LLM4Log: A Systematic Review of Large Language Model-based Log
Analysis
ZEYANG MA,Software PErformance, Analysis, and Reliability (SPEAR) lab, Concordia University, Canada
JINQIU YANG,Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Canada
TSE-HSUN (PETER) CHEN,Software PErformance, Analysis, and Reliability (SPEAR) lab, Concordia
University, Canada
Software systems generate massive, evolving, semi-structured logs that are central to reliability engineering and AIOps, yet
difficult to analyze at scale under drift and limited labels. Recent advances in pretrained Transformer models and instruction-tuned large language models (LLMs) have reshaped log analysis by enabling semantic generalization and cross-source
evidence integration, but also introducing deployment risks such as context limits, latency and cost, privacy constraints, and
hallucinations. This paper presentsLLM4Log, a systematic review of LLM-based log analysis across the end-to-end pipeline,
from upstream logging-statement generation and maintenance to log parsing/structuring and downstream tasks including
anomaly detection, failure prediction, root cause analysis, and log summarization. Following a structured search and manual
screening protocol, we completed literature collection in November 2025 and identified 145 unique papers across seven
logging tasks. We organize the research area through a unified, task-driven taxonomy, summarize common design patterns
(prompting/ICL, retrieval grounding, fine-tuning, tool/agent augmentation, and verification), and analyze evaluation practices,
datasets, metrics, and reproducibility. Based on these cross-paper analyses, we summarize key lessons and open challenges
for reliable real-world adoption. We emphasize robustness under drift and long-tail events, grounding and faithfulness for
operator-facing outputs, and deployment-oriented designs with verifiable behavior.
CCS Concepts:•Software and its engineering→Software maintenance tools.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Log analysis, Software logs, Large language models
1 Introduction
Software systems, from cloud services and microservices to networked and cyber-physical infrastructures, emit
massive volumes of execution logs that record runtime states, events, and failures. Logs are a primary source of
evidence for reliability engineering and operations: they support debugging, monitoring, incident triage, and
postmortem analysis [36, 192, 219]. However, modern log streams are notoriously difficult to analyze at scale. They
aresemi-structured(mixing free-form text with identifiers and code-like tokens),high-volume/high-velocity, and
continuously evolvingdue to software updates, configuration changes, and deployment diversity. Consequently,
manual inspection and keyword search remain common yet brittle, while automated pipelines often suffer from
format drift, long-tail behaviors, limited labeled data, and inconsistent logging quality [21, 46, 47, 87, 139].
Authors’ Contact Information: Zeyang Ma, Software PErformance, Analysis, and Reliability (SPEAR) lab, Concordia University, Montreal,
Canada, m_zeyang@encs.concordia.ca; Jinqiu Yang, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University,
Montreal, Canada, jinqiu.yang@concordia.ca; Tse-Hsun (Peter) Chen, Software PErformance, Analysis, and Reliability (SPEAR) lab, Concordia
University, Montreal, Canada, peterc@encs.concordia.ca.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM XXXX-XXXX/2026/5-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
arXiv:2604.16359v2  [cs.SE]  19 May 2026

To address these challenges, the research community has developed a rich body of work on automated
log analysis, typically organized as a pipeline spanning logging practice, parsing/structuring, representation
learning, anomaly/failure detection, failure prediction, diagnosis, and summarization [47]. In production settings,
however, log analysis is constrained by operational realities. Incidents unfold under time pressure. Log streams are
interleaved across services, hosts, and tenants. Failures manifest through long causal chains. The most diagnostic
events are often rare, noisy, or buried in high-volume background messages [102, 192]. Moreover, engineers rarely
rely on logs alone. Effective triage requires correlating logs with metrics/traces, historical incidents, runbooks,
and code/configuration context [102, 192]. These characteristics make log analysis not only apattern recognition
problem, but also anevidence-integrationandhuman decision-supportproblem. Log-centric LLM systems are
therefore distinct from broader LLM4AIOps settings: logs combine natural-language-like descriptions with
code-like identifiers, exhibit ambiguous template/value boundaries, evolve under version and deployment drift,
and often carry the chronological symptom evidence that operators use to diagnose failures. The challenge is not
merely to classify patterns, but to interpret noisy, long-tail runtime evidence in a form that remains useful for
human decision making.
The classic log-analysis pipeline was largely shaped before instruction-tuned LLMs became widely available,
when methods were either rule-based or relied on fixed representations and task-specific supervision. In recent
years, there has been a rapid methodological transition: pretrained Transformer language models, including
modern LLMs, are increasingly used as the backbone for log analysis. Unlike traditional approaches that heavily
depend on templates, handcrafted features, or patterns inferred from previously observed log outputs, LLMs
offer semantic generalization and can condition on heterogeneous evidence (e.g., logs together with tickets,
traces/metrics, runbooks, configurations, and code/configuration context), which can be especially useful in
modern operational workflows [20, 42, 68]. In log-centric settings, this matters because the same failure may
surface through heterogeneous wording across components and versions, while the most useful diagnostic
evidence is often sparse, context dependent, and embedded in long chains of runtime messages rather than in a
single fixed template.
retrieval
RAG /
Case base / KB
/ Vector index
Inputs: Source code context, project
conventions, historical loga/issues
Outputs: New/updated log statements
(level + message + variables)
LLM-assisted Logging
(Logging statement
generation & maintenance)
{ }
Prompting / ICL for "where/what/
how to log"
Retrieval of project-specific
conventions (RAG)
Fine-tuning on logging datasets
Consistency checking / refactoring
suggestions
Policy filtering (privacy-sensitive 
fields)
logging
LLM-based Log Parsing
Inputs: Raw log lines (+ headers),
existing template inventory
Outputs: Templates + parameters (+
event IDs)
2023-10-27,10:15:30
INFO [main]
Connection estab-lished to 192.168.1.1
on port 8080
Template:
"Connection established
to <IP> on port <Port>"
Parameters:
('IP' : '192.168.1.1',
'Port' : '8080')
Event ID:E123
Few-shot prompting for template
extraction
RAG with template inventory 
/ exemplars
Hybrid: regex/header extraction + 
LLM parsing
Verification / consistency checks
Cost control: 
batching, caching,fallback parsers
Log Representation
Inputs: Parsed events/templates 
(+ parameters), windows/sessions
Outputs: Event/window embeddings;
structured features
Encoder embeddings (BERT-like)
Domain pretraining / continued
pretraining
Contrastive learning / metric learning
Parameter-aware encoding
Retrievel index construction (for
downstream RAG)
Downstream tasks
risk forecast / horizonanomaly score / label
Root cause analysis:
Anomaly detection:
Log summarization:
Failure prediction:
concise incidentranked causes +evidence narrative
Inputs: Representations + retrieved
evidence (tickets/metrics/traces)
Outputs: Alerts, precictions, Fanked
causes, summaries/actions
Prompting on windows 
(direct inference)
RAG with historical incidents
Tool / agent augmentation (query
metrics/traces)
Grounded generation
Verification / uncertainty 
Fig. 1. An overview of LLM-based log analysis across the pipeline, from logging to downstream tasks. Note that some
downstream studies operate directly on raw or lightly normalized log windows and therefore bypass explicit log parsing.
This shift is already visible across theentirelog-analysis pipeline. Figure 1 provides an overview of how LLMs
are applied across the log-analysis pipeline. Upstream, LLMs are used togenerate and maintain logging

statements, helping developers decide where to log and what to record under project conventions. At the core
of many pipelines, LLMs are applied tolog parsing, converting raw messages into structured templates and
parameters with improved robustness under drift, unseen formats, and long-tail events [6]. Between parsing and
downstream inference, LLMs are also increasingly used forlog representation learning, producing semantic
embeddings or contextualized event representations for logs that improve robustness and transferability under
drift. Downstream, LLMs are used foranomaly detectionandfailure prediction, but also increasingly for
operator-facing tasks such asroot cause analysis(RCA) andlog summarization, where explanation quality and
evidence integration are as important as prediction accuracy [20, 42]. Although parsing is a common intermediate
stage, some downstream studies instead operate on raw or lightly normalized logs, so the pipeline should be
read as a common analytical structure, not a mandatory sequence of steps. At the same time, LLM-based log
analysis introduces new trade-offs and risks that are less prominent in classic pipelines: context window limits,
latency/cost constraints in online settings, privacy and data-governance concerns, sensitivity to prompting and
retrieval design, and hallucinations that can mislead incident response if outputs are not properly grounded and
verified [20, 68].
Given the pace and breadth of this emerging area, practitioners and researchers need a consolidated, task-driven
view of (i)whereLLMs are applied in the log-analysis pipeline, (ii)howthey are integrated (e.g., prompting/ICL,
retrieval grounding, fine-tuning, tool/agent augmentation, and verification), (iii)howthey are evaluated (datasets,
metrics, baselines, and reproducibility), and (iv)whatremains open for real-world deployment. While prior
surveys have reviewed automated log analysis broadly [47] and recent work has summarized specific subareas
such as LLM-based log parsing [6], a systematic, end-to-end review of the full LLM4Log landscape is timely.
In this paper, we presentLLM4Log, a systematic review oflarge-language-model-based log analysis. We focus
on software runtime logs as the central evidence source, while also covering multimodal studies in which logs
remain an important part of the operational evidence. We conducted a structured literature collection and manual
screening process, with the corpus collection completed in November 2025. Using a task-driven search and
screening protocol, we identified 162 task-paper records spanning seven log-analysis tasks. Since some studies
address multiple tasks, we deduplicated the task-paper records by title, resulting in 145 unique papers published
between 2020 and 2025. Building on this corpus, we organize the field through a unified taxonomy and cross-paper
analyses.
Our goal is to offer a consolidated, end-to-end reference for how LLMs are applied to log analysis, what works
in practice, and what remains open. To that end, we make the following contributions:
• A systematic, task-driven mapping of LLM4Log research (2020–2025).We provide a curated and
categorized corpus, summarize the temporal and task distribution, and characterize where the community
concentrates effort and where gaps remain.
• A pipeline-level review of log-centric LLM methods.We review and compare LLM-based approaches
for (i) logging statement generation and maintenance, (ii) log parsing, and (iii) downstream tasks (anomaly
detection, failure prediction, root cause analysis, and log summarization), highlighting reusable design
patterns and recurring trade-offs across the log-analysis workflow.
• Cross-cutting insights, evaluation caveats, and future directions for LLM4Log.We distill lessons
about evaluation practices, robustness under drift and long-tail events, grounding and faithfulness for
operator-facing outputs, privacy/security constraints, deployment practicality, and reproducibility, and
we summarize these observations in a dedicated cross-cutting section that outlines priorities for reliable
real-world adoption.
Paper organization.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our systematic survey
methodology. Section 3 provides LLM background and a taxonomy of adaptation/enhancement paradigms for
log analysis. Section 4 reviews LLM-based logging statement generation and maintenance. Section 5 surveys

LLM-based log parsing. Section 6 covers downstream log analysis tasks, including anomaly detection, failure
prediction, root cause analysis, and log summarization. Section 7 synthesizes recurring insights, open challenges,
and future directions across tasks. Finally, Section 8 concludes the survey.
2 Survey Methodology
To build the literature corpus for this survey, we conducted a structured search for publications onLLM-based log
analysis. We used a flagship-venue-first search strategy. We started from major software engineering venues to
build a focused initial paper set. We recognize that this choice may under-represent some interdisciplinary or
industry-facing work. We therefore complemented the initial venue-based search with backward and forward
snowballing, and with digital-library and academic-search cross-checking to broaden coverage. The literature
collection was completed in November 2025. The complete paper list and corpus metadata are available in our
online repository: https://github.com/zeyang919/LLM4Log.
Stage 1
Flagship-venue-first
keyword search
Searched flagship soft-ware engineering venues
52 unique papers
Stage 2
Backward and forward snowballing
Papers connected to the
Stage-1 seed set through
citation/reference links
70 unique papers
Stage 3
Digital-library
and academic-search cross-check
Remaining included
papers identified through
database and search
cross-checking
23 unique papers
Final corpus
145 unique
papers
Fig. 2. Workflow of the literature collection process.
2.1 Literature collection protocol
Stage 1: flagship-venue-first keyword search.We began with keyword-based searches in the following
software engineering venues, which constituted our Stage-1 flagship-venue-first search set: ICSE, FSE, ASE,
ISSTA, ICST, ICSME, ISSRE, ESEM, ICPC, TSE, TOSEM, EMSE, JSS, and IST as shown in Table 1. This stage yielded
52 unique papers, as summarized in Figure 2. Table 1 summarizes the venues covered in the Stage-1 search.
Table 1. Stage-1 search venues and year range.
Type Venues Years
Conference ICSE, FSE, ASE, ISSTA, ICST, ICSME,
ISSRE, ESEM, ICPC
2020–2025
Journal TSE, TOSEM, EMSE, JSS, IST 2020–2025
We used combinations oflog-relatedandLLM-relatedkeywords. The log-related keywords include terms such
as“log”, “system log”, “runtime log”, “log analysis”, “log parsing”, “log anomaly detection”, “failure prediction”, “root
cause analysis”, “incident diagnosis”, “log summarization”, the LLM-related keywords include terms such as“large
language model”, “LLM”, “Transformer”, “BERT”, “GPT”, “ChatGPT”, “in-context learning”, “prompting”, “retrieval-augmented generation”, and “agent”. We iteratively refined the keyword set as we encountered task-specific
terminology and community-preferred phrasing (e.g., operational diagnosis and troubleshooting terms).

Stage 2: snowballing to extend coverage.From the seed set obtained in Stage 1, we performed backward
snowballing by inspecting references and forward snowballing by checking citations to discover additional
relevant papers that may not be easily retrieved via keyword queries, such as papers using non-standard
task names or papers emphasizing systems and operations rather than “log” in titles or abstracts. We also
tracked community resources that aggregate log-analysis and LLM-for-operations literature, such as benchmarks,
dataset/toolkit papers, and curated lists, as auxiliary entry points. This stage contributed 70 additional unique
included papers (Figure 2).
Stage 3: digital-library cross-check.To reduce omission risk and broaden coverage beyond the Stage-1 venue
set, we cross-checked our corpus using major digital libraries and preprint servers (i.e., IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital
Library, SpringerLink, Elsevier/ScienceDirect, Wiley Online Library, arXiv, and OpenReview), and used Google
Scholar for additional coverage checks and citation tracing. This stage contributed the remaining 23 unique
included papers, completing the final corpus of 145 unique papers shown in Figure 2. We report the number of
included papers added at each stage because the search and screening process was iterative across venue search,
snowballing, and digital-library cross-checking.
Scope control and manual screening.Keyword searches inevitably return false positives due to term ambiguity
and task overlap. For example, some papers include both“root cause analysis”and“LLM”keywords, but their
methods are not sufficiently log-relevant for our scope, whereas other multimodal papers use logs indirectly
through derived operational artifacts such as incident summaries. Similarly, the term “log” can refer to non-runtime
logs (e.g., query logs, change logs, process mining event logs) or even mathematical “log” usage. Therefore, after
retrieving candidates, we manually screened each paper by reading the title, abstract, and the method/evaluation
sections, and included studies as long as software/system runtime logs were used directly or indirectly. Because
some multimodal operational-analysis papers incorporate logs indirectly, not as a standalone explicit modality,
inclusion sometimes required manual judgment based on the task definition, system description, and evaluation
setup.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria.A paper is included if it satisfies all of the following: (1) it targets one or
morelog analysistasks (e.g., parsing/representation, anomaly/failure detection, failure prediction, diagnosis/RCA,
summarization, or related operational assistance); (2) it uses a Transformer-based pretrained language model
(encoder-only, encoder–decoder, or decoder-only) via prompting/ICL, retrieval grounding, fine-tuning/post-training, tool augmentation/agents, or representation learning; and (3) it reports an empirical evaluation, abla-tion/analysis, or a concrete case study that directly or indirectly uses logs. We exclude work where logs are only
mentioned hypothetically, are clearly peripheral, focus on non-runtime log types, or are not meaningfully used
in the method or evaluation.
Data extraction protocol.For each included paper, we extracted structured information to support later taxonomy construction and cross-paper comparison. Importantly, the extracted fields depend on thetask typeof the
paper. Across tasks, we recorded: (i) target task(s), (ii) dataset type and whether logs were used alone or with
auxiliary artifacts (e.g., metrics/traces/tickets/runbooks/code/config), and (iii) evaluation setup. In addition, for
each task, we explicitly extracted task-relevant technical details, such as:baseline LLM(s),LLM enhancement/adap-tation paradigm(s)(e.g., ICL, retrieval grounding/RAG, fine-tuning, tool/agent augmentation, verification), and
evaluation metric(s). When a paper addressed multiple tasks, we categorized it by its primary contribution while
retaining cross-references to its secondary tasks and extracted fields accordingly. The complete paper list and
extracted metadata are available in our online repository.
2.2 Corpus summary and categorization.
Based on our task-driven screening, we identified 162 relevant studies spanning seven log-analysis tasks, published
between 2020 and 2025. The literature search was completed in November 2025. Because some papers cover

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
80number of papers
Logging
Log Parsing
Log Representation
Anomaly Detection
Failure Prediction
Root Cause Analysis
Log Summary
20 (20)
(12.3%)
37 (29)
(22.8%)
3 (1)
(1.9%) 70 (60)
(43.2%)
4 (3)
(2.5%)
25 (20)
(15.4%)
3 (1)
(1.9%)
T otal paper: 162 (deduplicated: 145)
Fig. 3. Temporal and overall distribution of LLM4Log analysis papers across tasks. Note: Pie chart labels are shown as n (u),
where n counts task papers (not deduplicated) and u counts unique papers (deduplicated).
multiple tasks (e.g., a pipeline that both parses logs and detects anomalies), after deduplication by title, the corpus
contains 145 unique papers. Notably, the pre-LLM log-analysis survey by He et al. [47] reported 158 log-analysis
papers published from 1997 to 2020. In contrast, within only 2020–2025, we already observe 145LLM-based
log-analysis papers,which suggests rapid growth in LLM-based log-analysis research and a clear recent
increase in research attention that motivates a dedicated LLM4Log survey. Figure 3 summarizes the corpus
from two complementary views: thetemporal trendover years (left) and thetask composition(right).
Table 2. Top venues by number of papers in our
LLM4Log corpus.
Venue #Papers
arXiv 29
ICSE 11
ASE 7
ISSRE 7
FSE 6
CIKM 5
ICLR 5
EMSE 4
TOSEM 4
ICPC 3
Note:We report the top 10 venues in the paper. The
full list is available in our online repository.
The task distribution (Fig. 3, right) is highly skewed. Most papers concentrate on Anomaly Detection and Log Parsing, together
accounting for roughlytwo-thirdsof all task-paper records, which
reflects where LLMs are most immediately useful in practice:
identifying suspicious behavior under noisy, drifting logs and
structuring raw logs into analyzable forms. At the same time, the
corpus also shows a clear expansion toward more downstream,
operator-facing tasks. In particular, Root Cause Analysis forms a
sizable slice and grows rapidly in the most recent years, indicating
a shift from “detecting something is wrong” toward “explaining
why and what to do, ” often requiring richer reasoning and evidence integration.
Temporally, the corpus spans 2020–2025 and exhibits a pronounced surge in recent years (Fig. 3, left). Only a small number
of papers appeared before 2023, followed by a sharp jump in 2024
and an even larger volume in 2025. Beyond the overall growth,
the per-task evolution is also informative: anomaly detection appears earliest and grows steadily, while several downstream tasks
emerge later and accelerate quickly (e.g., RCA and log summarization are largely concentrated in the most recent
period). This pattern suggests that the community first adopted LLMs where they could be plugged into existing

pipelines (detection/parsing) and then progressively pushed them toward higher-level operational assistance as
models and prompting/retrieval techniques matured.
Finally, the venue landscape indicates both broad dissemination and strong SE anchoring. As summarized
in Table 2, a noticeable fraction of the corpus appears as preprints (reflecting the fast-moving nature of LLM
research), while many peer-reviewed papers are mainly published in software engineering venues. Interestingly,
the venue concentration differs by task: papers on anomaly detection are much more widely distributed across
research communities and venues (e.g., systems, security, networking, data mining, and AI), whereas topics closer
to software engineering practice (e.g., logging and some parsing work) are more likely to appear in SE-focused
outlets. This cross-venue spread reinforces that LLM4Log is inherently interdisciplinary: it inherits operational
problems from SE while drawing methods and evaluation norms from multiple adjacent fields.
2.3 Relation to existing surveys.
In recent years, several surveys and reviews have summarized progress in automated log analysis and related
LLM-based operational analytics. He et al. [47] offered a broad survey of automated log analysis for reliability
engineering, summarizing established pipelines spanning logging practice, compression, parsing, anomaly
detection, failure prediction, and diagnosis, and largely reflecting the pre-instruction-tuned-LLM era. As LLMs
entered log analytics, more focused surveys emerged. Beck et al. [ 6] concentrated onsystem log parsing with
large language models, emphasizing how LLMs convert raw logs into structured templates and fields and how
such parsers are evaluated. Akhtar et al. [1] reviewedLLM-based event log analysisin a broader sense, motivated
primarily by the needs of security professionals and covering event logs from multiple computing contexts,
including system, application, and network logs. Their survey mainly summarizes what LLM techniques have
been applied to event logs, while our work uses software runtime logs as the organizing lens for task structure,
evaluation practice, and open challenges.
Several adjacent surveys also provide useful comparison points without being log-centric in the same way as
our work. Remil et al. [136] reviewed AIOps solutions for incident management across tasks, data sources, and
technical approaches. Zhou and Fokaefs [216] surveyed AI assistants for the incident lifecycle in microservice
environments, considering observability data such as logs, traces, and metrics. Wang and Qi [174] surveyed root
cause analysis in (micro)services across logs, traces, metrics, and multimodal data. From the operational analytics
side, Zhang et al. [200] discussed AIOps in the LLM era at a broader reliability-engineering level, where logs are
one type of operational data among metrics, traces, alerts, incidents, and other signals.
Overall, our survey complements these efforts by focusing specifically onLLM4Log. Compared with prior
surveys, our scope is defined by treating software runtime logs as the central evidence source across the workflow,
while still accounting for multimodal settings in which logs may be used directly or indirectly through derived
operational artifacts. By contrast with the broader event-log, incident-management, and RCA surveys above,
our emphasis is the end-to-end software/system runtime log workflow, not a wider observability or incident-response problem setting. As summarized in Table 3, our survey differs from prior work in three ways: it is
log-centric, not modality-agnostic, it spans the workflow from logging and parsing to downstream analysis tasks,
and it emphasizes how LLM-based methods interact with deployment constraints and evidence quality in real
operational settings.

Table 3. Positioning of this survey relative to representative prior surveys.
Survey Focus LLM Difference from our survey
He et al. [47] Broad log analysis before the
recent LLM wave
No Updates the field for the LLM era with a dedicated
log-centric focus
Beck et al. [6] LLM-based system log parsing Yes Extends beyond parsing to the full log-analysis work-flow
Akhtar et al. [1] LLM-based event-log analysis
across security and computing
contexts
Yes Mainly summarizes what LLM techniques exist for
event-log analysis. Our survey focuses on how
LLM4Log is structured, evaluated, and where open
challenges remain
Remil et al. [136] AIOps incident-management
review
No Broader incident management rather than LLM-based
log-centric analysis
Zhou and Fokaefs [216] AI assistants for incident life-cycle in microservices
No Incident-lifecycle support across logs, traces, and metrics rather than log-centric analysis
Wang and Qi [174] RCA survey in (micro)services No Focuses on one downstream task and broader observ-ability signals rather than the full LLM4Log workflow
Zhang et al. [200] LLM-enabled AIOps and relia-bility engineering
Yes Covers broader LLM4AIOps workflows across logs,
metrics, traces, alerts, and incidents. Our survey focuses on how LLM methods are adapted and evaluated
when runtime logs are the central evidence source
2.4 Threats to validity.
Our survey collection methodology faces several limitations. First, the flagship-venue-first search strategy
improves precision and anchors the survey in core software engineering venues, but it may still miss some
interdisciplinary, industry-facing, or rapidly emerging work despite the subsequent snowballing and digital-library
cross-checking. Second, the search process depends on keyword design, so relevant papers that use uncommon
terminology may be harder to retrieve in the initial stages. Third, screening required manual judgment, especially
for multimodal studies in which logs may be used indirectly instead of serving as a standalone explicit modality.
Finally, some screening decisions are inherently subjective, especially for multimodal papers where the role of
logs is not described clearly. In such cases, we included papers that we believed were sufficiently related and
relevant to the scope of this survey.
Cross-paper evaluation remains a threat to validity. The studies covered in this survey differ in their datasets,
label definitions, model families, prompts, decoding settings, and evaluation metrics. In addition, many papers do
not report enough prompt or inference details to support exact reproduction. For LLM-based methods, results may
also vary across runs because of stochastic decoding, model updates, retrieval choices, or context selection. These
differences make it difficult to compare reported performance numbers directly across papers. For this reason,
our main conclusions focus on recurring design patterns, common evaluation gaps, and practical constraints in
LLM4Log research. We treat claims about the best-performing method as exploratory.
3 LLM Background & Taxonomy for Log Analysis
LLMs have become a practical tool for log-centric software operations because logs are semi-structured, drift
over time, preserve execution chronology, and are typically interpreted alongside heterogeneous artifacts (tickets,
dashboards, traces, configurations, and code) [40, 72, 103, 108]. This section explains why logs form a distinct
setting for LLM-based analysis, how major model families map to log-analysis workloads, and how adaptation
paradigms interact with operational constraints such as drift, grounding, privacy, latency, and cost.

3.1 Why LLMs are a Good Fit for Log Tasks
Logs as semi-structured text that bridges natural language and code.A key reason LLMs fit log analysis
is that log messages sit between natural language and code. A typical log line mixes free-form descriptions
(symptoms, actions, causal hints) with code-like structure and identifiers (function and class names, stack frames,
paths, IPs, config keys, request IDs, error codes) [62, 74]. This hybrid format aligns with two core LLM strengths:
natural-language understanding and code-aware pattern modeling [24, 108]. At the same time, log analysis is not
just generic text understanding: the boundary between stable templates and variable values is often ambiguous,
and the same token may be a symptom, parameter, component name, or incident clue depending on context. As a
result, LLMs can capture intent and semantics that are often discarded when logs are reduced to templates/event
IDs, and can still remain robust when token vocabularies evolve (e.g., new components, identifiers, or new error
strings) [64, 103].
Latent semantics beyond templates and surface patterns.Although many classic pipelines reduce logs to
templates/event IDs, real log messages encode operational meaning: what operation was attempted, what failed,
which component is implicated, how severe it is, and what the system was doing right before/after [72, 74]. These
signals are frequently expressed implicitly via linguistic cues (error idioms, temporal markers, causal connectors,
negation), code-like cues (exception types, API names, call sites, module prefixes), and temporal ordering across
neighboring events [40, 103]. This makes logs different from many standalone text artifacts: they often carry
a symptom chronology that operators use to reconstruct incidents. LLMs can exploit these cues to support
interpretation, explanation, and cross-source integration, especially when purely symbolic representations are
brittle or incomplete [42, 68, 98].
Robustness under drift, partial observability, and long-tail behaviors.Logs evolve with versions, configu-ration changes, feature flags, and deployment environments. Meanwhile, rare events are common in operations
and often carry disproportionate diagnostic value, even when they appear too infrequently for stable supervised
learning [64, 103]. Compared with fixed-vocabulary or rule-based parser-dependent pipelines, LLM-based repre-sentations and prompting enable soft matching and semantic generalization, which helps when (i) rule-based
parsers fail or drift, (ii) labeled anomalies/failures are scarce, or (iii) the same underlying issue is described with
heterogeneous phrasing across services and versions [4, 103, 188].
Unifying heterogeneous evidence into a single reasoning space.In production triage, the relevant evidence
rarely lives in logs alone [20, 42]. Engineers correlate logs with traces/metrics, tickets, runbooks, configurations,
and sometimes code diffs [ 20, 42]. LLMs can condition on mixed inputs (log snippets, retrieved historical
cases, metric summaries, runbook steps, code/config fragments) and produce operator-oriented outputs such as
hypotheses, ranked causes, incident narratives, and action candidates [42, 68, 98]. This ability to work across
heterogeneous artifacts matches the reality of AIOps workflows, but a log-centric view remains necessary because
logs often provide the chronological symptom evidence around which other signals are interpreted [42, 68].
Human-facing outputs and decision support.Many operational tasks require a narrative (what happened,
what changed, why likely) and not just a score/label [42, 68]. LLMs can highlight evidence, translate technical
fragments into concise explanations, and generate structured artifacts for handoff (e.g., timelines, suspected
components, extracted entities) [20, 98, 100]. However, free-form generation increases the risk of hallucinated
rationales or overconfident claims [20, 68]. In practice, LLMs are most reliable when outputs are constrained and
augmented (e.g., by quoting evidence spans, using structured extraction, or tying claims to retrieved/tool-produced
facts) rather than relying on unconstrained storytelling [42, 98, 100].

3.2 Evolution of LLMs: Architectures and Training Stages
Transformer backbones for long-context log modeling.Most LLM-based log-analysis methods build on
Transformer architectures [170], whose self-attention mechanism supports scalable contextual modeling across
long input windows. This matters for logs because useful cues can be far apart (e.g., an early warning followed
by a later error burst), and multi-line context often changes the meaning of individual events [170].
Encoder-only models: masked language modeling and contextual embeddings.Encoder-only pretraining with masked language modeling (MLM), popularized by BERT [ 24] and its variants (e.g., RoBERTa [ 95],
ELECTRA [17]), learns bidirectional contextual representations. Compared with decoder-only chat-style LLMs,
encoder-only models typically have fewer parameters and lower inference cost, and some log-analysis papers
therefore refer to them aspretrained language models (PLMs), not LLMs. However, since they are still substan-tially larger than traditional log models and have a large body of log-centric research, we treat them as part
of the broader LLM family in this survey [130]. In log analytics, encoder-only LMs are most useful as efficient
representation and scoring backbones [24, 40]. Their pretraining objectives can support semi- or unsupervised
anomaly signals, while their embeddings support retrieval, clustering, and lightweight downstream heads for
anomaly/failure classification when some supervision exists [17, 24, 40, 69, 135].
Encoder–decoder models: conditional generation and structured transformation.Encoder–decoder
Transformers generalize from representation learning to conditional generation: an encoder ingests the input
sequence and a decoder produces an output sequence [160, 170]. Representative families include T5 [134] and
BART [78], which are typically trained with denoising or text-to-text objectives [ 78, 134, 171]. For logs, this
paradigm is most relevant when the task transforms one textual form into another: incident summarization,
noisy-message normalization, structured extraction, or template-like rewriting conditioned on surrounding
context [78, 134, 142].
Decoder-only models: autoregressive pretraining and general-purpose assistance.Decoder-only autore-gressive LMs dominate interactive settings because they are flexible under prompting and can be scaled to strong
instruction-following behavior [11, 66]. Representative examples include the GPT family [11] and open-weight
decoder models such as LLaMA-style backbones [ 167]. For log analysis, they are attractive when workflows
require open-ended reasoning, hypothesis generation, retrieval-augmented triage, remediation suggestions, or
multi-turn operator interaction, especially when labeled data is scarce [120, 180]. The trade-off is higher inference
cost and latency, which motivates selective escalation and hybrid designs discussed later [149].
Key capabilities that matter for log tasks.Across architectures, several capabilities are particularly relevant to
log analysis [10, 79, 116, 120, 181, 194]:(1) semantic normalization and abstraction—mapping heterogeneous
phrasings to consistent meanings and grouping variants of the same issue.(2) contextual disambiguation—
interpreting the same token differently depending on surrounding components, timestamps, and execution
context (crucial under drift).(3) evidence integration over long contexts—integrating signals across many
lines and multiple sources (logs, traces, metrics, tickets), typically mediated by windowing or retrieval in practice.
(4) controllable outputs—producing operator-facing artifacts (ranked lists, extracted entities, timelines) instead
of only free-form text.(5) reasoning and decomposition—breaking complex tasks into steps (form hypotheses,
retrieve context, verify, refine), which underpins agentic log analysis pipelines.(6) software and code aware-ness—understanding stack traces, API names, configuration keys, and common failure modes, enabling more
actionable interpretation than purely surface-level text matching [13].
3.3 LLM Capability and Specialization Taxonomy for Log Analytics
LLMs used in log analysis can be grouped by specialization level, which often determines where they fit in the
log pipeline [10].

General-purpose LLMsare trained broadly on large-scale, diverse text corpora and excel at natural-language interpretation, summarization, and interactive assistance [11, 116]. They are useful for prompt-based log understanding, RCA narratives, and incident reporting, but usually need retrieved context to handle organization-specific
terminology, component names, and operational conventions [43, 79, 116, 120].
Code-oriented LLMsare trained or fine-tuned heavily on code and technical corpora, improving performance
on stack traces, error messages, configuration files, and program-context reasoning [ 13, 33, 178]. They are a
better fit when log interpretation depends on linking symptoms to code/config, call stacks, APIs, or remediation
commands [13].
Domain-tailored LLMsadapt a backbone to a specific operational domain (e.g., AIOps for cloud platforms,
network diagnostics, ICS security) via continued pretraining, instruction tuning, or explicit knowledge integra-tion [43, 120]. They are most valuable when logs contain specialized vocabularies, recurring incident patterns,
and internal operational procedures that general-purpose models cannot infer reliably [43].
3.4 Adaptation and Enhancement Paradigms
Off-the-shelf LLMs are often not trainedspecificallyfor log analysis: they rarely see an organization’s proprietary
log vocabulary, evolving component taxonomy, or operational ground-truth data (incidents, runbooks, and on-call
decisions) [10, 43]. Therefore, LLM-based log analysis approaches typically improve reliability by controlling
whatthe model sees (context and retrieved evidence) andhowit decides (prompting, reasoning scaffolds, tuning,
tools, and verification) [79, 120, 181, 194]. Below, we summarize the most common paradigms in terms of the
log-specific trade-offs they address: label scarcity, drift, grounding, controllability, inference cost, and deployment
practicality [10].
Prompting and in-context learning (ICL), including retrieval grounding.ICL treats the LLM as a training-free learner: prompts provide task instructions, output constraints, and a small set of demonstrations [11, 91, 113].
In log settings, effective ICL is rarely a single “classify this log” instruction. It typically includes: (i)input
normalization(variable masking, deduplication, component/time grouping), (ii)bounded evidence(top- k
suspicious lines/windows rather than full streams), (iii)schema-constrained outputs(labels, ranked candidates,
JSON fields), and (iv)system-specific exemplars(a few representative normal/failure patterns from the same
environment) [91, 113].
A common extension isretrieval-augmented generation (RAG), which retrieves relevant context (e.g.,
similar historical windows/incidents, runbook passages, known signatures, or indexed summaries) and injects
it into the prompt as additional demonstrations or evidence [79]. In many log-analysis pipelines, RAG can be
viewed as anICL enablerrather than a separate paradigm: retrieval supplies high-quality in-context examples
and system knowledge at inference time, without changing model weights [ 79]. This “retrieve→ prompt→
decide” pattern improves bothgrounding(anchoring outputs to concrete evidence) andadaptation(bringing
system-specific knowledge under drift) [43, 79].
ICL remains attractive for rapid deployment and heterogeneous tasks, but it is sensitive to prompt quality,
context selection, and distribution shift. As a result, many practical approaches combine RAG-augmented ICL
with lightweight filtering (to reduce prompt noise) and downstream verification (to prevent overconfident
hallucinations) [91, 113].Reasoning scaffolds: CoT, ToT, and structured decomposition.Many log tasks
(especially diagnosis and remediation) benefit from explicit decomposition rather than one-shot generation [181,
217].Chain-of-Thought (CoT)prompting encourages stepwise reasoning (e.g., identify key symptoms → map
to components→ hypothesize causes→ justify with evidence) [181]. In log settings, CoT is most useful when
intermediate artifacts arecheckableandgrounded(e.g., extracted entities, cited log lines, matched templates),
not when it produces purely speculative narratives [ 176, 181].Tree-of-Thought (ToT)generalizes CoT by

exploring multiple candidate hypotheses/paths, scoring or pruning them, and selecting the best [176, 195]. This
matches operational diagnosis where multiple plausible causes exist. ToT-style search can be implemented via self-consistency sampling, explicit branching (e.g., per service/component), and re-ranking using retrieved evidence
or tool outputs [ 176, 195]. The practical trade-off is cost: ToT multiplies calls/tokens, so it is often reserved
for high-severity complex incidents, and paired with retrieval and/or a smaller model to narrow the search
space [195]. More generally, many approaches adoptstructured decompositionwithout explicitly naming
CoT/ToT by splitting the workflow into stages such as symptom extraction, candidate generation, evidence
retrieval, and final decision [194, 217].
Fine-tuning and post-training for log tasks.When data is available, training often yields better stability
than pure prompting [43]. It is useful to distinguish: (i)continued pretraining(domain-adaptive pretraining
on large unlabeled log corpora) to improve coverage of log vocabulary and style, (ii)supervised fine-tuning
(SFT)on labeled log tasks, (iii)parameter-efficient tuning (PEFT)(e.g., LoRA/adapters) to reduce cost and
enable more frequent updates under drift, and (iv)post-training/alignment(instruction tuning and preference
optimization) to improve instruction following, format adherence, and safety/harmlessness behaviors [120, 133].
In log analysis, post-training is especially relevant when the model must (a) reliably follow output schemas, (b)
avoid leaking sensitive data in summaries, and (c) produce calibrated, non-overconfident explanations (including
the ability to abstain) [120]. A common pattern ishybrid training: fine-tune a smaller encoder/LM for scoring
or classification while using a larger aligned model for explanation and interactive assistance [10, 116]. Another
pattern istask-to-instruction transformation, where multiple log tasks are cast into a unified instruction
format so one model can support classification, extraction, and generation consistently [120].
Tool augmentation and agentic workflows.Agentic log-analysis approaches extend in-context retrieval by
letting an LLM iteratively call external tools to gather, filter, and validate evidence [111, 140, 194]. Typical tools
include log search/index queries, metric/trace dashboards, ticket/KB/runbook lookup, config/code retrieval, and
lightweight parsers or summarizers that pre-compress high-volume inputs [111]. This paradigm is a natural fit
for real-world log analysis because a single prompt window is rarely sufficient: relevant signals may be scattered
across long time spans, multiple components, and heterogeneous repositories [111, 194].
Agentic workflows commonly follow a loop of: (i)planning(what evidence to obtain next and which hypotheses to test), (ii)acting(tool calls for retrieval, slicing, aggregation, or correlation), (iii)observing(interpreting
tool outputs and updating the working context), and (iv)deciding(producing a final prediction/explanation/-
summary with evidence pointers) [194]. The benefits are stronger grounding and broader coverage. The costs are
latency, more failure modes (tool errors, cascading mistakes), and higher security risks (e.g., prompt injection via
retrieved documents) [111, 140]. Accordingly, practical deployments often add guardrails such as allow-listed
tools, bounded iterations, schema validation, and conservative fallback behaviors [111, 148].
Verification, calibration, and controllability.Because log analysis is high-stakes and noisy, many approaches
add explicit reliability layers:self-consistency(sample multiple reasoning paths and aggregate),cross-checking
(verify claims against retrieved lines/windows or tool outputs),schema validation(force typed/JSON outputs
and reject invalid responses),evidence citation(require each claim to point to a log span or retrieved document),
andselective generation(generate only after candidate filtering by a smaller model) [ 63, 65, 105, 176]. These
paradigms reappear throughout the task sections. Section 7 later compares their trade-offs in terms of supervision
needs, inference cost, robustness under drift, controllability, and operational fit.
3.5 Practical Concerns: Privacy, Security, Compliance, and Efficiency
Logs may contain sensitive identifiers (user IDs, IPs, hostnames), infrastructure topology, security indicators,
and occasionally personal data [31, 70]. As a result, deploying LLMs for log analysis is often governed as much
byprivacy/security constraintsas by model accuracy, whilelatency and costremain first-class operational

requirements [31, 34]. These concerns are widely recognized in the literature, but rigorous production-scale
validation remains limited and uneven across tasks.
Commercial LLMs vs. self-hosted LLMs.Commercial LLMs are typically consumed viaremote APIs, meaning
prompts (and any retrieved context inserted into them) must be transmitted to an external model provider [31, 34].
This increasesdata exposure riskand reduces end-to-end controllability: even with contractual terms and
vendor assurances, organizations may have limited visibility into provider-side handling (e.g., retention, secondary
processing, or cross-region routing) and must treat the prompt as a potentially sensitive payload [ 12, 31]. In
contrast, self-hosted (open-source) models keep inferencewithin the organization’s trust boundary, making data
handling more controllable: access can be restricted via internal IAM, prompts/outputs can be logged or disabled
under local policy, and compliance requirements (e.g., residency) can be enforced operationally [34]. However, self-hosting shifts responsibility to the operator: the main risks become the local security posture, including securing
model-serving endpoints, hardening the retrieval stack, and protecting stored prompts, retrieved documents, and
generated outputs [34].
Tool-augmented and retrieval-based workflows amplify these issues regardless of deployment. Untrusted
retrieved text can introduce prompt-injection style instructions, and generated summaries/explanations can
inadvertently echo secrets or sensitive identifiers if not constrained [12, 38].
Common mitigations in log analysis pipelines.Typical mitigations include: (i)minimization(send only
the smallest relevant window and avoid full dumps), (ii)redaction/masking(identifiers, secrets, tokens), (iii)
bounded retrieval disclosure(retrieve on-prem, but pass only small snippets/fields), (iv)RBAC and auditing
(who can query what and how prompts/outputs are safely logged), and (v)policy-constrained outputs(no
secret echoing, structured extraction, and citation requirements) [31, 34, 70]. These controls interact with utility:
aggressive redaction may remove key signals, so many approaches combine masking with structured extraction
and retrieval to preserve diagnostic content while limiting exposure [31, 34].
Cost drivers and practical optimizations.The main cost drivers are context length (tokens), number of model
calls (multi-pass/agentic workflows), and retrieval/embedding computation [23, 126]. Common optimizations
include windowing and deduplication, template compaction, hierarchical summarization, caching embeddings
and intermediate summaries, batching, andselective escalation(invoke a large model only after a cheaper filter
flags candidates) [111]. For self-hosted models, quantization and efficient serving reduce inference cost. For API
models, prompt compression and retrieval-first designs reduce token budgets [23, 126].
Hybrid designs as a practical deployment pattern.A frequent design issmall model for scoring/filtering
(ranking suspicious windows, candidate component selection, coarse labeling) pluslarge model for explanation
and summarization[ 10, 116]. This keeps expensive reasoning focused on a small subset of high-value context,
reduces latency, and yields operator-facing artifacts (summaries, rationales, action candidates) without incurring
LLM costs on every log line [111, 126]. In practice, such hybrids also simplify governance: only the most capable
(and often most sensitive/costly) components are exposed to the most sensitive or costly data [31, 34].
4 Logging Statement Generation and Maintenance
Logging statement generation studies how to automatically insert and update log statements in source code so
that systems emit informative runtime records for debugging and monitoring. In practice, insufficient logging
can hinder incident triage and reduce observability, whereas excessive or inconsistent logging introduces noise,
performance overhead, and scalability concerns. Hence, one active line of research is automated logging statement
generation, which aims to recommend or synthesize high-quality log statements so that developers can obtain
effective logs with less manual effort.

4.1 Task Definition
Logging statement generation is the task of inserting and updating log statements into source code so that,
during execution, the system emits textual records (logs) describing internal states and runtime events. Given
a code context (e.g., a method, a basic block, or a file), automated logging must decidewhereto place logs,
whatto record, andhowto phrase messages in a readable and maintainable way. A log statement is a hybrid
artifact that combines a code-level logging API call (e.g., logger.info(. . . ) ) with a concise natural-language
message and selected program variables. Effective generation, therefore, requires aligning program behavior
with project-specific conventions, such as naming, verbosity, and severity-level usage, typically implemented
through standard logging frameworks. This makes automated logging not only a code-generation problem, but
also an observability-design problem shaped by developer intent, code context, message readability, and runtime
diagnostic value [36, 87, 139, 219].
1publicUser getUser ( String userId ) {
2logger . info ( " Fetching user with id ={} " , userId ) ;
3try{
4User user = userRepository . find ( userId ) ;
5if( user ==null) {
6logger . warn ( " User not found : id ={} " , userId ) ;
7}
8returnuser ;
9}catch( Dat ab as eE xce pt io n ex ) {
10logger . error ( " Failed to fetch user : id ={} , error ={} " , userId , ex . getMessage () ) ;
11throwex ;
12}
13}
Listing 1. A simplified example of single-line logging in Java
Listing 1 illustrates a simplified Java method instrumented with three log statements, and Listing 2 shows the
corresponding runtime logs. The method logs an INFO message before accessing the repository, emits a WARN
when the requested user is missing, and records an ERROR upon a database exception. Each statement pairs a
concise event description with a small set of diagnostic variables (e.g., the user identifier and exception message),
enabling developers to reconstruct key control-flow decisions and failure context from the log stream.
1INFO 2025 -05 -12 10:15:03 UserService - Fetching user with id = U1024
2WARN 2025 -05 -12 10:15:03 UserService - User not found : id = U1024
3ERROR 2025 -05 -12 10:15:04 UserService - Failed to fetch user : id = U1024 , error = connection timeout
Listing 2. Example single-line runtime logs emitted by Listing 1
In practice, logs are commonly placed at execution milestones, boundary interactions with external components,
and exception-handling paths, where recorded context is most useful for diagnosis [36, 219]. Most systems rely on
standard logging frameworks that provide unified APIs and configurable formatting. In Java, widely used options
include java.util.logging [117], Log4j 2 [ 3], SLF4J [132], and Logback [ 131], while Python typically uses
the built-in logging module [128], sometimes complemented by structlog [141] or loguru [22]. Accordingly,
automated logging techniques generally assume these APIs and aim to generate statements that can be directly
inserted and compiled in real projects.
4.2 Challenges
Although logging is essential for observability, producing high-quality logs in practice is non-trivial. Prior
automated approaches, typically based on heuristics, static analysis, and traditional machine-learning models,
have therefore faced persistent limitations. Existing studies consistently suggest that logging usefulness is largely
determined by three intertwined decisions: where to log, what to log, and how to keep logs effective over
time [36, 84, 214, 219].

4.2.1 Where-to-Log: Placement and Coverage.A core difficulty of logging is decidingwherea statement should
be inserted. Logs placed too sparsely may miss critical runtime evidence, reducing diagnosability, whereas
overly dense logging introduces noise, log flooding, and runtime overhead [ 8, 36, 84, 219]. In real systems,
diagnostically important events often occur along complex, low-frequency control-flow paths (e.g., rare branches,
retries, and exception chains), making it difficult to identify insertion points that reliably capture true execution
states [36, 83, 219].
Traditional automated techniques often suggest logging-statement placement using local syntactic cues (e.g.,
method entry/exit, catch blocks, API calls) or handcrafted rules over AST patterns [ 108, 185, 187, 219]. Such
signals are inexpensive and scalable, but they are weak proxies for diagnostic value: they may over-instrument
common patterns while missing semantically important events that span multiple statements or methods [82, 162].
Static-analysis-based methods can improve precision by tracking control flow and exceptional paths, yet they
still struggle to decide which program points are worth logging from a human-debugging perspective, and they
often produce redundant locations when applied at scale [25, 36, 83]. Moreover, placement decisions made in
isolation are difficult to reconcile globally: a log that appears useful within one method may be inconsistent or
redundant when viewed across the system, especially in large-scale or distributed applications [36, 83, 215, 219].
4.2.2 What-to-Log: Level, Message, and Variables.Even if a location is chosen, determiningwhatto record remains
challenging. First, log levels encode severity and expected frequency, but these levels are often ambiguous in real
projects. The same event may be viewed asINFO in one module and WARN in another, leading to inconsistency and
unreliable filtering during incident response [49, 86, 219]. Second, messages must convey clear event semantics,
yet developers frequently struggle to express intent concisely, avoid vague wording, and align with project
terminology [87, 219]. Third, selecting which variables to include is subtle: missing key variables reduces
diagnostic value, whereas logging too many values increases verbosity [25, 83, 219]. These issues are exacerbated
by the need to maintain a consistent style across contributors, components, and versions.
Prior approaches typically decompose this decision into separate subtasks, such as level prediction and
variable selection, using local features (identifiers, types, nearby API calls, shallow data-flow signals) and then
fill messages with templates [82, 86, 219]. This decomposition is convenient for modeling, but it often yields
incoherent outcomes, for example, a predicted level that does not match the message phrasing or variables that
are only weakly related to the event being described. Template- and pattern-based message generation further
struggles to express nuanced intent (e.g., distinguishing a transient network hiccup from a persistent configuration
error), producing rigid or generic strings that provide limited diagnostic cues. Overall, the fundamental difficulty
is that level, variables, and message are semantically coupled decisions, whereas many traditional techniques
treat them as largely independent.
4.2.3 How-to-Log: Quality, Maintainability, and Evolution.Logging quality is not only about writing a single
statement correctly, but also about keeping logs useful throughout software evolution. As code and requirements
change, logs can become stale, misleading, or incorrect (e.g., referring to outdated conditions, variables, or
execution phases), yet they are rarely updated with the same rigor as functional code [59, 175, 214]. In addition,
practical logging must respect non-functional constraints, such as performance overhead, storage budget, and
privacy/security policies, which further complicate the amount and type of information that can be safely
recorded [47, 215].
Traditional tooling provides limited support for maintaining logs over time. Simple consistency checks (e.g.,
unused variables, formatting rules) can catch surface-level issues, but they do not reliably detect semantic drift,
in which the code behavior changes while the log message remains plausible [ 59, 214]. Likewise, mining- or
rule-based detectors often rely on project-specific patterns and are brittle in the face of refactoring, API evolution,
or style changes [84, 214, 219]. As a result, projects accumulate redundant, inconsistent, or outdated logs, gradually
reducing the overall utility of the logging infrastructure and increasing maintenance costs [84, 214].

Table 4. Summary of LLM-based automated logging studies organized by task category.
Paper Task Paradigm Input Output Context/TechniqueBase Model(s)ComparisonsMetric(s)
Full Logging Generation (General Purpose: Location, Message, Variables)
LANCE [108] Full Gen Fine-tuning Java Method Log Stmt - T5 - Acc, BLEU
FastLog [185] Full Gen Fine-tuning Method +
AST
Insert Point AST Locator PLBART - Acc, BLEU
LEONID [109] Multi-Log Fine-tuning Full Method 0-N Logs - T5 - BLEU, METEOR
ELogger [37] Block Gen Fine-tuning Code Block Single Log Block Features Enc-Dec - -
UniLog [187] Full Gen ICL Method Loc+Level+MsgWarm-up Demos Codex, GPT-3 - PA, LA, MA
SCLogger [83] Full Gen ICL + CoT Method Log Stmts Call Graph (2-hop) GPT-4,
LLaMA2
GPT-3.5 PA, AOD, F1
PDLogger [25] Full Gen ICL + CoT Method +
Slice
Logs Backward Slicing o3-mini,
DeepSeek
LLaMA3-70B PA, L-ACC
AUCAD [199] Align Gen Fine-tuningMethod + Issue
Logs Issue Alignment LLaMA3.1 Magicoder PA, LA, VF1
Zhong et al. [215] Full Gen Fine-tuning Java Method Logs Compact Model FTLLaMA-8B,
Mistral
GPT-4o,
Claude
PA, LA, F1
Specialized Logging Generation (Test Code, File-level, Configuration)
File-Level [138] File Gen ICL Python File Multi Logs Pipeline Stages GPT-4o-mini - L-ACC, AOD
Test-Code [150] Test Log ICL Test Method Assert/Log Test Intent GPT-3.5,
CodeLlama
GPT-4o,
Llama3
Acc, BLEU
ConfLogger [146] Config Log ICL + Rules Config Code Logs Config Analysis GPT-4o - LA, AOD
Benchmarks, Empirical Studies, and Visions
LogBench [82] Study ICL / Zero Method Level+Msg - GPT-3.5/4 InCoder, Star-Coder
BLEU, ROUGE
AL-Bench [162] Benchmark - Java Code Logs Benchmark Suite - - ALD, DEA
Auto-Logging [8] Vision - - - AI Instrumentation - - -
Specific Log Tasks (Level Prediction, Defect Detection, Repair, Quality)
Heng et al. [49] Level Pred FT / Zero Snippet Level - CodeLlama-13B
BERT,
RoBERTa
Acc, AUC
OmniLLP [119] Level Pred RAG + ICLLog + Neigh-bors
Level Cluster Retrieval CodeXEmbed - ARI, AUC
LogUpdater [214] Log Repair Agent Defect Log Fixed Log Defect TaxonomyCodeT5+, GPT-4o
Claude3.5 BLEU, ROUGE
Defects4Log [175] Detection ICL + CoTMethod + LogDefect Type Defect Patterns DeepSeek-R1 GPT-4o Precision, Recall
LOGIMPROVER [84] Quality - Codebase Improved
Logs
Proactive Analysis - - -
4.3 LLM-based Approaches for Logging Statement Generation
Table 4 groups recent LLM-based logging studies by task category, while the discussion below emphasizes the
methodological paradigms behind them. Across these paradigms, the key idea is to exploit LLMs as joint models
over code and natural language, so that the three core decisions, where to log, what level to use, and how to
phrase the message and variables, are no longer made by hand-crafted rules or local classifiers. These logging
decisions emerge from learned semantic patterns and in-context reasoning. Below, we organize prior work by
how it uses LLMs and highlight the mechanisms that make each paradigm effective.
4.3.1 Fine-tuned End-to-End Generators.Early work treats logging as a sequence-to-sequence learning problem
and fine-tunes encoder–decoder models to transform raw code into logged code. LANCE [108] fine-tunes a T5
model on pairs of Java methods with and without logging, so that the model learns to rewrite an input method
into an output method containing an injected log statement. During decoding, the model jointly decides where
to insert the statement, which level to use, which variables to log, and how to phrase the message. This joint
modeling is precisely where LLMs outperform handcrafted AST patterns: instead of matching rigid templates,

the fine-tuned model learns the distribution of logging patterns from large corpora and can adapt to unusual
constructs, such as nested exceptions or multi-call sequences, without additional rules.
As the first end-to-end LLM-based automated logging tool, LANCE delivers an innovative proof of concept.
Yet, it suffers from three key limitations: (1) rewriting the entire method may inadvertently alter non-logging
code, (2) full-method input and output incurs substantial latency compared to local insertion, and (3) it always
injects exactly one log statement, thus failing to decide when logging is unnecessary or when multiple logs are
required. Subsequent approaches explicitly refine the use of fine-tuning to mitigate these issues. FastLog [185]
decouples location from content: a learned module first predicts fine-grained insertion points, and the LLM then
generates only the log statement to be inserted. This changes the learning problem from “rewrite the whole
method” to “predict a small edit” and thus preserves the original code while reducing decoding cost. LEONID [109]
extends LANCE by teaching the model to predict not just the content of a single log, but also whether a method
needs logging at all and how many logs to insert. This turns the fixed one-log-per-method assumption into a
learned, method-level decision, closer to how developers actually log. ELogger [ 37] pushes the same idea to
block level: it first classifies whether a block warrants logging and only then invokes the generator, reducing
over-instrumentation by using the LLM where it matters most. AUCAD [199] further strengthens this fine-tuning
line by automatically constructing aligned datasets from log-related issues. The model is trained not just on
arbitrary method/log pairs, but on positive and negative examples mined from real bug reports, which sharpens
its notion of “good” versus “bad” logging behavior.
Overall, these fine-tuned generators demonstrate that LLMs can implicitly encode common logging idioms and
jointly model location, level, message, and variables. Their main trade-off is training and deployment cost: models
are tied to specific architectures and datasets, motivating lighter-weight paradigms such as in-context learning.
4.3.2 Prompt-based In-Context Learning.With stronger LLMs, an alternative to task-specific fine-tuning is
prompt-based in-context learning (ICL). Compared with fine-tuned models, ICL-based approaches greatly reduce
training and infrastructure costs and make it easier to deploy or swap models in practice. UniLog [187] is the
first general-purpose framework to systematically exploit ICL for logging. It feeds the target method, along with
a small set of (code, log) examples from the same project, and asks a Codex-like model [13] to output the location,
level, and message. Mechanistically, UniLog leverages an emergent ability of LLMs: given a handful of exemplars,
the model can infer a project’s logging style (e.g., how verbose to be, which variables to mention) and apply that
style to new methods. A warm-up strategy stabilizes this behavior by first exposing the model to generic logging
patterns before switching to project-specific examples, reducing variance across invocations.
ICL-based methods shift the burden from training to prompting: instead of adjusting millions of parameters,
practitioners adjust the prompt. This makes automated logging much easier to deploy or migrate between
models, and it directly leverages LLM strengths in style transfer and pattern imitation. File-level ML logging [138]
prompts GPT-4o-mini with Python pipeline files and a few annotated examples, letting the model infer where
to place logs at pipeline boundaries. Test-code logging [150] supplies test methods and exemplar test logs so
that the model learns to describe test intent and failure conditions. ConfLogger [146] combines static analysis to
find configuration-sensitive operations with ICL prompts that show how such operations are typically logged,
enabling the LLM to specialize its suggestions for configuration diagnosability.
4.3.3 Execution-Aware Reasoning with CoT and Static Context.While plain ICL uses only the immediate method
body, real logging decisions often depend on broader execution context and on a chain of reasoning (e.g.,
“this call propagates an error from a lower-level component, so it should be logged at ERROR”). To expose this
context and reasoning to the LLM, several works enrich prompts with chain-of-thought (CoT) style structure and
execution-aware static information.
SCLogger [83] augments the input with two-hop callers and callees on the call graph and organizes the prompt
in a CoT fashion. Instead of giving the LLM only the target method, SCLogger explicitly injects the surrounding

static context: which functions call this method, what it calls, and how logging is used there. This design exploits
a key LLM capability: when given a broader static context, the model can infer variable roles (e.g., which ID
identifies a request versus a user), propagate logging conventions across the call chain, and better align with
project-specific patterns without extra training. The CoT-style prompt further nudges the model to “think through”
why a location is important before emitting a final log statement.
PDLogger [25] makes the execution link even tighter by performing backward slicing from predicted log
locations. Data and control dependencies along the slice are turned into explicit prompt tokens, and variables
flowing into the logging site are enumerated with their syntactic and semantic roles. In effect, PDLogger transforms
implicit runtime behavior (which values influence this point, under which conditions) into an explicit context for
the LLM. This allows the model to simulate execution more accurately and to generate multiple log statements per
method that are consistent with the underlying control and data flow, instead of relying solely on local patterns.
These CoT- and execution-aware prompts thus serve as a bridge between classical program analysis and LLM
reasoning: static analyses compute precise dependencies, and the LLM uses them to perform high-level semantic
reasoning and message generation.
4.3.4 Retrieval-Augmented Logging and Subtasks.Some prior research focuses on specific subtasks (e.g., level
prediction, message reconstruction) and combines LLMs with retrieval-augmented generation.
For log levels, Heng et al. [49] benchmark a range of models in zero-shot, few-shot, and fine-tuned settings,
showing that local code context suffices in many cases but that borderline severity levels remain difficult.
OmniLLP [119] takes a retrieval-augmented view: it clusters log statements by semantic similarity and developer
ownership, then retrieves representative neighbors to include in the prompt when predicting the level for a
new log. Here, retrieval plays to LLM strengths in analogical reasoning: instead of deciding “in the abstract”
whether a statement is INFO or WARN, the model compares the target context against a handful of concrete, project-specific examples and chooses the level that best aligns with those patterns. This improves level consistency and
disambiguation for borderline cases, effectively grounding the LLM in real project practices.
LogBench [82] investigates the message and level subtasks via a fill-in-the-blank formulation. It constructs
paired datasets of original methods (LogBench-O) and transformed-but-functionally-equivalent methods (LogBenchT), removes existing log statements, and asks LLMs to reconstruct the level and message at fixed locations. This
approach isolates “what-to-log” from “where-to-log” and assesses whether models rely on brittle syntax or
genuine semantic understanding: if performance holds on LogBench-T, where surface syntax has changed, the
model is likely relying on deeper semantic cues. By comparing a variety of commercial and open-source LLMs
under this setup, LogBench clarifies which architectures and prompting strategies are better at reconstructing
realistic log content.
4.3.5 Agentic Pipelines for Log Maintenance.Finally, some work goes beyond generating new logs by using
LLM agents in multi-step maintenance pipelines. LogUpdater [214] first uses a classifier (trained on synthesized
defective logs) to detect and categorize logging defects, and then invokes an LLM such as CodeT5+ or GPT-4o to
repair the flagged statements. The approach decomposes the task: a lightweight detector narrows down suspicious
logs, and the LLM focuses on high-level semantic repair (e.g., aligning message text with code behavior and fixing
mismatched variables or temporal descriptions). By separating “where is something wrong?” from “how should it
be rewritten?”, LogUpdater reduces the risk of unconstrained LLM edits and leverages the model’s strength in
natural-language revision instead of raw anomaly detection.
Defects4Log [175] complements this pipeline view by providing a benchmark and taxonomy for log defects
and systematically evaluating LLMs’ ability to classify and reason about them. Together, these efforts illustrate a
broader pattern: instead of using LLMs as single-shot generators, logging research increasingly wraps them in
agentic workflows—detect, classify, explain, repair—so that each step can be checked, constrained, or retried, and
logs can evolve along with the codebase.

In summary, LLM-based approaches for logging differ not only in which tasks they tackle, but also in how
they expose code, context, and prior examples to the model. Fine-tuned generators encode logging patterns into
model parameters and jointly model location, level, message, and variables, which helps with where-to-log and
what-to-log decisions but increases training cost and reduces portability. ICL methods exploit style imitation and
adapt quickly to project conventions, but are sensitive to prompt and example quality. CoT, static context, and
slicing ground placement and variable choices in control/data-flow evidence, improving semantic grounding at the
cost of additional system complexity. Retrieval-augmented subtasks improve consistency for levels and messages
through project-specific neighbors, but depend on retrieval quality. Agentic pipelines support how-to-log and
maintenance by decomposing detection, classification, explanation, and repair, but introduce more moving parts
and validation needs. These mechanisms collectively explain why LLMs can address long-standing challenges in
where-to-log, what-to-log, and how-to-maintain-logs that were difficult to handle with hand-crafted rules or
traditional ML alone.
Across studies, the key shift introduced by LLMs is not raw generation capability but the ability to treat logging
intent as a semantic inference problem instead of a syntactic insertion task. The most effective approaches
consistently constrain and inform LLMs using execution-aware context, project-specific exemplars, or multi-step control, instead of relying on unconstrained generation. At the same time, LLMs do not eliminate the
ambiguity of logging decisions but relocate difficulty from rule design to context selection, validation, and
oversight, pointing toward hybrid, iterative maintenance workflows as a common design pattern.
4.4 Performance Evaluation Metrics
For automated logging, evaluation has gradually shifted from “exact-match-centric” reporting to a more nuanced,
component-wise view. Early end-to-end generators often borrowed machine translation-style metrics (e.g., n-gram
overlap such as BLEU [122]) because the task was framed as producing a single reference-like statement for each
context. However, as LLM-based methods moved to prompt-based generation and multi-log settings, two issues
became hard to ignore: (1) logging is inherently under-specified (multiple insertion points or phrasings can be
equally reasonable), and (2) surface-form metrics are brittle (semantically correct messages can score poorly due
to paraphrasing). As a result, more recent evaluations increasingly combine strict metrics (for comparability) with
softer, semantics-aware ones (for faithfulness), such as embedding-based similarity metrics like BERTScore [204].
Below, we summarize the most widely adopted metrics for each aspect and highlight what they capture (and
what they miss).
Forlogging-statement position, the de facto metric isPosition Accuracy (PA): whether the predicted
insertion point matches the reference point at an agreed granularity (often statement/block instead of exact line).
PA is easy to interpret and facilitates comparability across papers, so it remains a useful headline number. However,
PA becomes less informative once methods are allowed to output multiple logs or “no log” decisions, because
the problem is no longer a single-label prediction. In such cases, it is more appropriate to treat placement as a
set prediction problem and reportprecision/recall/F1over predicted logging-statement position. This directly
exposes two practically relevant failure modes: over-instrumentation (low precision) and under-instrumentation
(low recall).
Forlog level,Level Accuracy (LA)(or L-ACC) is the simplest and most commonly reported metric. Yet
log levels are not purely categorical in practice: they have an ordinal meaning (e.g., predicting WARN when
the reference is ERROR is typically less harmful than predicting DEBUG). Therefore, modern evaluations often
complement LA with an ordinal-distance metric, such asAverage Ordinal Distance (AOD), to quantify the
extent to which predictions deviate along a severity scale. In addition, because log levels can be imbalanced (e.g.,
INFO dominates), macro-F1 or per-class reporting is often more diagnostic than a single LA number when the
goal is to understand behavior on rare but critical levels.

Forlog message, exact-match metrics such asMessage Accuracy (MA)are increasingly treated as a “strict
sanity check” instead of the main quality signal, since natural language admits paraphrases. To maintain backward
compatibility, many studies still report overlap-based metrics such asBLEU/ROUGE, but these metrics mainly
reflect surface similarity and can penalize semantically faithful rephrasing [122]. For LLM-generated messages,
it is now common (and more defensible) to additionally report a semantics-aware metric such asBERTScore,
which compares contextual embedding similarity instead of exact token matches [204]. Finally, edit-distance-style
measures (token/character Levenshtein distance) are useful when the paper’s objective includes developer fixing
effort: they approximate how much manual editing is needed to correct a generated message.
Forvariables, the field has largely converged on viewing variable logging as a set selection problem. Accordingly,Variable Precision/Recall/F1is often more informative than a single “all-or-nothing” accuracy.
These metrics separate “missing important variables” (low recall) from “logging too many irrelevant variables”
(low precision), and they also interact naturally with hallucination checks (e.g., penalizing variables that do not
exist in scope). In addition, if a method jointly generates message and variables, it is worth reporting variable
metrics separately from message metrics to avoid conflating semantic description quality with instrumentation
completeness. Overall, automated-logging results are not fully comparable across papers because studies differ
in dataset construction, insertion granularity, task decomposition (full generation versus subtask prediction),
whether multiple valid logs/messages are accepted, programming language and project context, and metric
choice.
5 Log Parsing
Modern software systems generate massive volumes of execution logs to support debugging, monitoring, and
reliability engineering. However, the scale and velocity of log streams make manual inspection impractical:
operators must quickly locate relevant events, correlate symptoms across components, and identify anomalous
behaviors under strict time constraints. This motivates automated log analysis, which treats logs as machine-processable data instead of free-form text. A prerequisite for most downstream log analytics is log parsing, the
process of converting raw log lines into structured event records [6, 47]. By normalizing heterogeneous messages
into reusable templates and extracting runtime parameters, log parsing enables efficient indexing, aggregation,
statistical modeling, and cross-run comparison, and thus directly impacts the effectiveness of tasks such as
anomaly detection, failure prediction, and root cause analysis. Parsing is also where log-specific LLM challenges
become especially visible: the parser must decide ambiguous template/value boundaries, preserve stable event
identities under drift, cover long-tail templates, and still operate under streaming-scale constraints.
We review LLM-based log parsing via reusable paradigms and the approaches that make them practical at
scale, highlighting how they address the limitations of traditional parsers (format drift, long-tail events) and what
new trade-offs they introduce (e.g., context budgets and coordination overhead).
5.1 Task Definition
Log parsing is the task that transforms each raw log line into a structured representation that separatesinvariant
event semantics fromdynamicruntime values. Concretely, given a raw log line x, a parser typically outputs (i) a
set ofheader fields(e.g., timestamp/date, severity level, process/thread, component), (ii) alog template t where
dynamic spans are replaced by placeholders (e.g., <*>), and (iii) aparameter list v that records the extracted
runtime values. At the stream level, especially in online settings where logs must be parsed on-the-fly as they
arrive, parsers often maintain atemplate inventory(or event dictionary) and assign anevent IDto each unique
template so that the raw stream can be converted into an event sequence for downstream mining [46, 164, 177].
Figure 4 illustrates this objective with Hadoop logs. For example, raw messages such as “Jetty bound to port
62267” and “Jetty bound to port 62258” differ only in the concrete port number, yet they represent the same

Date Time Level Process Component Log Template
2015-10-18 18:01:52 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.http.HttpServer2 Jetty bound to port <*>
2015-10-18 18:01:52 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.http.HttpServer2 Jetty bound to port <*>
2015-10-18 18:01:52 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.yarn.WebApps Web app <*> started at <*>
2015-10-18 18:01:53 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.app.RMContainerRequestor nodeBlacklistingEnabled:<*>
2015-10-18 18:01:53 INFO IPC Server org.apache.hadoop.ipc.Server IPC Server listener on <*>: starting
2015-10-18 18:01:51 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.http.HttpServer2Jetty bound to port 62267
2015-10-18 18:01:51 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.http.HttpServer2Jetty bound to port 62258
2015-10-18 18:01:52 INFO main org.apache.hadoop.yarn.WebAppsWeb app /mapreduce started at 62267
2015-10-18 18:01:53 INFO main org.apache.hadoop. app.RMContainerRequestornodeBlacklistingEnabled:true
2015-10-18 18:01:53 INFO IPC Server org.apache.hadoop.ipc.ServerIPC Server listener on 62270: starting
Log ParsingParsed logs
Log messages
Fig. 4. An example log parsing result from Hadoop.
underlying event. A correct parser normalizes them to the same template “Jetty bound to port <*>” and extracts
the port number as a parameter. Similarly, the message “Web app /mapreduce started at 62267” is parsed into the
template “Web app <*> started at <*>”, separating stable keywords (e.g., “Web app”, “started at”) from variable
tokens (e.g., the path and port).
In practice, log parsing is rarely a single monolithic step. Most pipelines implement it as a two-stage process.
First, apreprocessingstage extracts standard fields and isolates the message body. This stage is typically
implemented using regular expressions or log format specifications because these header fields are usually
emitted in a framework-controlled and relatively stable format (e.g., the timestamp/level/thread/component
layout is determined by logging libraries and configuration, and thus changes slowly and predictably). Second, a
message parsingstage focuses on the remaining free-text-like body and performs template–parameter separation.
Unlike headers, the message body is largely developer-written and varies widely across components and versions.
It mixes natural-language-like phrases with project-specific tokens and runtime values, and it evolves as code
changes. As a result, a single set of regular expressions is rarely sufficient to robustly normalize message bodies
without either over-generalizing templates or exploding them into many variants. Across these implementations,
the core goal remains the same: to produce stable templates that support consistent grouping while accurately
extracting the parameters needed for diagnosis.
5.2 Challenges
Although log parsing has been studied extensively, traditional (non-LLM) parsers face persistent difficulties
because logs are semi-structured artifacts produced by evolving software. These difficulties arise from both the
data(highly variable message styles and continuous drift) and theoperational requirements(low latency, high
throughput, and stable event identities in online pipelines). Below, we summarize four recurring challenges that
limit the robustness of traditional parsers.
5.2.1 Structural variability and format drift.Logs exhibit substantial structural variability across systems, compo-nents, and logging libraries, and even within the same system, different modules may adopt different writing
styles, delimiters, and token conventions. Many traditional parsers therefore embed implicit assumptions about
message structure (e.g., token positions, separators, fixed vocabularies, or stable prefix patterns) to make parsing
tractable [21, 46]. Such assumptions can work well for the formats they were designed around, but they degrade
when encountering unseen layouts, rare formatting choices, or cross-component inconsistencies.

Crucially, this variability is not static: log formats drift over time as code evolves, dependencies are upgraded,
configuration changes alter logging layouts, and developers revise wording for readability or diagnostics [64, 104,
198]. Under drift, an initially accurate template inventory can become stale, causing template fragmentation (the
same event being split into multiple templates) or erroneous merges (different events being grouped together).
Rule-based parsers then require continuous maintenance, while data-driven parsers trained on historical logs can
suffer when the distribution of templates or vocabulary shifts.
5.2.2 Ambiguous template–variable boundaries.Even with a stable structure, deciding which tokens areinvariant
versusvariableis inherently ambiguous. Runtime values have various forms (IDs, UUIDs, paths, IP addresses,
error codes), and some values may appear constant within a single deployment but should be treated as variables
across runs (e.g., stable ports or hostnames in a fixed environment). Conversely, some numeric tokens or symbols
are semantically meaningful constants (e.g., HTTP status classes or well-known error codes) that should remain
in templates.
As a result, common heuristics such as “all digits are variables” or delimiter-based splitting can lead to either
over-general templates (too many placeholders, losing discriminative semantics) or over-specific templates
(template explosion). Both outcomes reduce downstream utility: overgeneralization blurs distinct events, whereas
over-specificity fragments event types, harming aggregation and anomaly detection.
5.2.3 Long-tail patterns and coverage gaps.Real log streams often follow a heavy-tailed distribution: a small
number of frequent templates dominate the volume. In contrast, rare templates may be crucial for diagnosis (e.g.,
exception paths and failure-handling branches). Traditional parsers that rely on frequency cues or stable clustering
can underperform on the long tail. Rare patterns may be misclassified into frequent templates (degrading precision)
or split into many singletons (degrading recall and inventory usefulness), resulting in poor coverage precisely
where operators most need structured signals.
This long-tail effect also interacts with drift and boundary ambiguity: rare events provide fewer repetitive
examples to stabilize grouping, making them more vulnerable to mis-parsing when wording changes or when
variable boundaries are subtle.
5.2.4 Operational constraints and stability requirements.Operational log parsing is commonly performed at a
large scale, where millions of log lines must be processed with low latency, high throughput, and predictable
resource usage. Traditional parsers are attractive in production usages because they provide deterministic
execution and low per-line cost, but achievingbothhigh throughput and high accuracy becomes difficult as
structural variability and drift increase.
Moreover, many downstream pipelines assume that event identities remain stable across time windows (e.g.,
for alerting, dashboards, and anomaly detectors trained on historical event sequences) [47, 64]. Template churn
caused by drift, boundary ambiguity, or long-tail fragmentation can propagate instability into downstream
analytics, degrading both monitoring reliability and cross-run comparability.
5.3 LLM-based Approaches for Log Parsing
Table 5 shows that LLM-based log parsing has expanded from early capability probes into several reusable
methodological families. Across these families, the core idea is to trade brittle, log-specific heuristics (e.g.,
delimiter rules and fixed similarity thresholds) for semantic generalization: LLMs can better infer which spans
belong to the stable event skeleton versus instance-specific parameters, even when surface forms vary across
environments and versions. We distinguish the main learning/adaptation paradigm from orthogonal reuse and
efficiency mechanisms: a parser may be supervised, prompt-based, or retrieval/refinement-oriented, while still
using caches, grouping, scheduling, template memories, or tool-based decomposition to reduce cost and stabilize
online behavior.

Table 5. Summary of LLM-based log parsing approaches. The “LLM Technique” column describes the main learning/adaptation
paradigm, while “Reuse / Eff. ” records orthogonal scalability, reuse, or system-level efficiency mechanisms.
Paper Setting Superv. LLM Technique Reuse / Eff. Base Model(s) Metric(s)
Benchmarks and empirical analyses
Le & Zhang [73] Online Both Zero-/few-shot prompting study (capability analysis)– GPT-3.5 PA, GA, ED
Astekin et al. [4] Online Both Few-shot prompting comparison across LLMs – CodeLlama-7B ED, PA, LCS
LogEval [20] Offline Sup. Benchmark suite (multiple log-analysis tasks incl.
parsing)
– GPT-4 PA, ED
LogBase [197] Offline – Benchmark dataset for semantic log parsing – – –
LLMDPP [173] Online Sup. DPP-based diverse sample selection for few-shot
parsing
– Flan-T5-small GA, PA
VISTA [97] Online Sup. Variable-aware ICL (efficiency/cost-oriented study) Cache GPT-3.5-Turbo PA
Supervised and log-specific model adaptation
GPT-2C [144] Offline Sup. Fine-tuned GPT-style parser (Q&A formulation) – GPT-2 F1
LogStamp [164] Online Sup. Sequence labeling for template/parameter tagging – BERT-base RI
LogPPT [72] Offline Sup. Prompt-based few-shot token labeling – RoBERTa PA, GA, ED
LLMParser [103] Offline Sup. Few-shot fine-tuning for template generation – LLaMA-7B PA, GA
Mehrabi et
al. [110]
Offline Sup. Compact fine-tuning (effectiveness study) – Mistral-7B MLA, ED, F1
OWL [42] Offline Sup. Log foundation model training (IT operations) – OWL RI, F1
PreLog [74] Online Sup. Log foundation model pretraining (log analytics) – PreLog-140M GA, OA, ED, uPA
Le et al. [75] Online Sup. Few-shot tuning of semantic LLMs + adaptive
caching
Adap. cache RoBERTa (125M) GA, PA, FGA, FTA
LogLM [94] Offline Sup. Instruction tuning for log tasks – LLaMA-2-7B RI, F1
SuperLog [62] Offline Sup. Continual pretraining + interpretable domain knowl-edge
– LLaMA-2-7B RI, F1
Prompt-based and adaptive ICL parsing
DivLog [188] Online Sup. Adaptive few-shot ICL with prompt enhancement – GPT-3 (Curie) PA, PTA, RTA
Liu et al. [92] Online Unsup. Prompt strategies (fixed demos) for online parsing/-
analysis
– GPT-3.5-Turbo F1
Xu et al. [212] Online Unsup. Zero-shot prompting for template extraction Temp. DB GPT-3.5 PA, GA, ED
LogGenius [196] Online Unsup. Zero-shot prompting + synthetic log generation (assistance)
– GPT-3.5-Turbo PA
Zhou et al. [218] Online Unsup. Few-shot prompting (with a BERT-based component
in pipeline)
– GPT-3.5 GA, MLA, ED
LLM-TD [169] Offline Unsup. ICL-based template detection for security event logsTemp. cand. OpenChat FGA
Lemur [207] Online Unsup. Entropy-guided clustering + CoT template merging Cluster GPT-3.5 Template accuracy
LogRules [57] Offline Sup. ICL enhanced with rules (case-/rule-based knowl-edge injection)
Rules GPT-4o-mini +
LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct
PA, GA, ED, FGA, FTA
Retrieval/refinement-oriented parsing and system-level efficiency layers
LILAC [64] Online Sup. ICL + hierarchical demo sampling + cache refinementAdap. cache GPT-3.5 PA, GA, FGA, FTA
LogBatcher [184] Online Unsup. Demonstration-free parsing via retrieval (no labeled
demos)
Cache GPT-3.5-Turbo GA, MLA, ED
LogParserLLM [213]
Online Unsup. Grouping + multi-step prompting (RAG-style) Grouping GPT-3.5-Turbo GA, PA, FGA, FTA, GGD, PGD
SelfLog [123] Online Both Group-wise ICL with self-evolutionary merge tree Tree GPT-3.5 GA, PA, PTA, RTA
HELP [186] Online Both Embedding clustering + LLM template generation Cluster text-embedding-3-small + Claude-3.5-Sonnet
GA, FGA, PA, FTA
LibreLog [104] Offline Unsup. Retrieval-augmented parsing + self-reflection refine-ment
Temp. mem. LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct PA, GA
Parse-LLM [152] Online Unsup. Agentic decomposition with callable tools (header
separation, etc.)
Tools GPT-4 GA, FGA, PA, FTA
AdaParser [182] Online Unsup. Self-generated ICL + self-correction Tree GPT-3.5 GA, FGA, PA, FTA
Huang et al. [54] Online Unsup. Unsupervised parser with retrieval (no labeled exam-ples)
Temp. DB GPT-3.5 GA, FGA, PA, FTA
EPAS [15] Online Unsup. Asynchronous scheduling of LLM queries (tail-latency aware)
Async Llama-3.1-70BInstruct
GA, FGA, PA, FTA
SemanticLog [198] Online Unsup. Variable-aware template generation for large-scale
parsing
Cache LLaMA-2-7B GA, PA, FTA
Duan et al. [26] Offline Unsup. LogBatcher-style grouping + LLM template correc-tion
Cache GPT-3.5-Turbo GA, FGA, PA, FTA
InferLog [177] Online Unsup. ICL-oriented prefix KV-cache reuse + auto-tuning KV cache Qwen2.5-14BInstruct
PA, PTA, RTA, GA

5.3.1 Benchmarks and empirical analyses as the starting point.Early work primarily asked whether general-purpose LLMs can parse logs at all and how sensitive they are to prompting choices. Le & Zhang [73] provides a
representative capability analysis of GPT-3.5 (ChatGPT) under zero-/few-shot prompts, showing that seemingly
small prompt-format differences can materially change parsing quality. As the field matured, benchmark-style
efforts (e.g., LogEval [ 20]) began to standardize evaluation and make it clearerwhich aspectimproves (e.g.,
grouping versus precise template extraction), thereby enabling more comparable method design.
A key takeaway from follow-up empirical analyses is thatexample selectionandvariable handlingrepeatedly
emerge as high-leverage factors that affect both accuracy and cost (e.g., LLMDPP [173], VISTA [97], and compar-ative studies [4]). In other words, the “benchmark line” of work did not merely measure performance. It also
identified recurring design knobs that later approaches considered.
5.3.2 Supervised and log-specific model adaptation: training for structure and controllability.One family treats log
parsing as a supervised learning problem and leverages modern LLMs to learn invariant skeletons and variable
boundaries from data, often with greater tolerance for noisy token patterns than purely heuristic rules. A useful
way to view this family iswhere supervision is placed: some methods supervisetoken-level decisions(constant vs.
variable), while others supervisetemplate generationdirectly. LogPPT [ 72] is a label-efficient supervised parser.
It fine-tunes a RoBERTa model on a small labeled dataset to perform few-shot token-level parameter labeling,
reducing reliance on handcrafted parsing rules while remaining grounded in curated examples. Complementarily,
LLMParser [103] represents lightweight supervised adaptation via few-shot fine-tuning, enabling a compact
open-source LLM to directly generate templates with high accuracy when limited labels are available.
In parallel, log-specific pretraining and domain adaptation aim to internalize “log language” from large corpora,
narrowing the gap between natural text and log tokens. PreLog [74] illustrates this direction by pretraining a
log-focused model for log analytics tasks (including parsing), providing a stronger initialization than generic
LLMs for downstream log understanding. Overall, supervised paradigms tend to provide more controllable output
formats and predictable behavior (often with lower inference-time cost than per-line prompting), but they trade
off flexibility and maintenance: they rely on curated labels or domain corpora, and evolving templates may still
require re-training or re-alignment to sustain accuracy under drift.
5.3.3 Prompt-based and adaptive ICL parsing: structured generation without parameter updates.A second family
avoids parameter updates and instead casts log parsing as astructured promptingproblem: given a raw message, the
model is instructed to emit a normalized template (and optionally the extracted parameters) under a constrained
output format. This direction is attractive for rapid deployment because it can work in a zero-shot or a few-shot
manner without collecting training data. For example, Xu et al. [ 212] show that even a zero-shot LLM can
extract templates online when paired with a lightweight template repository to reuse previously derived results.
Beyond one-shot prompting, fixed-demo prompt strategies have been explored to stabilize parsing behavior
in streaming settings (e.g., Liu et al. [92]), and some pipelines further leverage synthetic or auxiliary LLMs to
improve downstream parsing quality (e.g., LogGenius [196]).
Within prompting, adaptive ICL refines the paradigm by selecting demonstrations on the fly instead of relying
on a static prompt. DivLog [ 188] is representative: it dynamically selects relevant labeled examples for each
incoming log, turning parsing into a contextual compare-and-contrast process that helps the model separate
invariants from variables for the specific message at hand. Empirical follow-ups suggest thatdiversityin the
selected examples and explicit treatment of variables are recurring levers for robustness and cost control (e.g.,
LLMDPP [173] and VISTA [97]).
More broadly, prompt-based parsing effectively converts “rules in code” into “rules in the prompt”, which
improves iteration speed and portability across models, but shifts the main technical challenge tocontrollability
and normalization: the approach must guard against over-generalization, inconsistent placeholders, and format
violations, which motivates explicit output constraints, prompt templates tailored to log syntax, and restricted

decision spaces such as candidate/template detection prompts (e.g., LLM-TD [169]) or rule-augmented prompting
(e.g., LogRules [57]). In effect, adaptive ICL shifts the core engineering problem from “design a single good prompt”
to “design a goodretriever/samplerfor prompts”, which improves coverage but introduces a new dependency on
selection quality and context-budget constraints.
5.3.4 Retrieval/refinement-oriented unsupervised parsing: reducing labels via self-generated context and iterative
correction.A third family targets the no-label regime by replacing curated demonstrations with retrieval and
refinement loops. Instead of supplying ground-truth templates as exemplars, these methods retrieve representative
logs (or groups of logs) as contextual anchors and let the LLM infer templates from the retrieved context.
LogBatcher [184] is representative: it performs demonstration-free parsing by retrieving or grouping similar
logs and querying the LLM only on representative instances, thereby reducing both labeling and query volume.
LibreLog [104] pushes this direction further with open-source models: it combines retrieval-augmented parsing
with iterative self-reflection and a template memory, using refinement to compensate for missing labels while
improving efficiency and privacy. Related work employs the same approach via self-generated ICL and self-correction mechanisms (e.g., AdaParser [182]) or via unsupervised template repositories that accumulate reusable
templates over time [54].
A recurring observation is that “unsupervised” here is rarely “single-shot”. Effectiveness hinges on the quality
of upstream grouping/retrieval: if retrieved logs mix multiple templates, the model may output an averaged,
over-general template. If retrieval is too narrow, variables may be frozen as constants. Consequently, many
approaches couple retrieval with explicitgrouping and correctionstrategies, such as embedding-driven clustering
before template generation (e.g., HELP [ 186]), entropy- or structure-guided grouping followed by template
merging/refinement (e.g., Lemur [207] and entropy-based correction pipelines [26]), and memory-based reuse to
converge toward stable inventories over long streams [54, 104]. In effect, these parsers trade manual labels for
approach-level iteration: retrieval/grouping proposes candidate structure, while refinement/memory stabilizes
templates across time and workload shifts.
5.3.5 System-level efficiency layers: grouping, caching, scheduling, and agentic decomposition.Across the paradigms
above, many approaches add system-level layers that make LLM parsing feasible in online or high-volume
settings. These layers are orthogonal to the main learning paradigm: a parser may use prompting, ICL, or
retrieval/refinement while also caching templates, grouping similar messages, scheduling LLM calls, or using
tools to decompose the workflow.
A common pattern is to explicitlyreusepast results to amortize LLM queries and stabilize outputs. LILAC [ 64]
exemplifies this engineering pattern: it combines accuracy-oriented ICL (via carefully selected demonstrations)
with an adaptive parsing cache that stores and refines templates over time, reducing repeated calls for recurring
patterns while improving consistency under streaming workloads. Some approaches attach a template repository
to zero-shot prompting so previously derived templates can be looked up and reused [212], while unsupervised
parsers can rely on a template database to eliminate labeled demonstrations but still exploit reuse across the stream
(e.g., Huang et al. [54]). Other approaches reduce open-ended generation by narrowing the search space, e.g., by
prompting the model to identify multiple templates from a batch or from candidate structures (LLM-TD [169]), or
by coupling semantic modeling with adaptive caching for robustness under drift [75].
Grouping-based approaches parse only a small set of representative logs and propagate templates to the rest.
LogParser-LLM [213] is representative of this family, using grouping and multi-step prompting to balance template
fidelity against query volume. Beyond grouping, execution-layer optimizations target tail latency and inference
overhead. EPAS [15] frames online parsing as an asynchronous scheduling problem, while other lines optimize
prefix/KV-cache reuse or agentic decomposition (e.g., InferLog [177] and Parse-LLM [152]). The key trade-off is
error amplification: once an incorrect template is cached, propagated, or promoted into memory, reuse layers
can spread it widely. Hence, practical approaches typically require cache update policies, validation/refinement

hooks, and sometimes variable-aware reuse strategies that explicitly track parameter slots to avoid template
corruption at scale (e.g., SemanticLog [198]). A useful takeaway is that these approaches treat LLM reasoning as
a high-quality but expensive primitive, and invest in coordination layers to maximize structured output per LLM
token.
Overall, the method families address different parts of the challenge space. Supervised and log-specific model
adaptation improves controllability and template–parameter boundary learning when labels or domain corpora
are available. Prompt-based and adaptive ICL parsing supports rapid deployment when labeled data are limited
and log patterns keep changing, but it depends on prompt and example quality. Retrieval/refinement-oriented
parsing reduces manual labeling and helps cover less frequent patterns, but it depends on grouping and retrieval
quality. System-level efficiency layers improve online throughput and output stability, but they can amplify
cached or propagated errors if validation is weak.
Early log parsing work focused on feasibility and prompting sensitivity, while more recent work increasingly
separates two concerns: the learning/adaptation paradigm used to infer templates, and the reuse or coordi-nation mechanisms used to make LLM parsing practical at scale. Importantly, these families of approaches
coexist. Supervised adaptation remains attractive when labeled logs are available, prompting dominates rapid
deployment, retrieval/refinement reduces labeling needs, and system-level reuse is essential for online or
mass scale. Across them, a unifying design principle is to combine LLM inference with lightweight parsing
components, sampling, retrieval, grouping, caching, and validation that amortize LLM cost while preserving
template stability under drift.
5.4 Performance Evaluation Metrics
Evaluation of log parsing has gradually shifted frommessage-levelheadline scores towardtemplate-levelmetrics,
because production logs are heavy-tailed and drift over time: frequent templates can dominate averages and
hide failures on rare but diagnosis-critical events. As a result, recent LLM-based parsers increasingly report
classic metrics together with template-level ones to better reflect robustness (e.g., LILAC [ 64], Le et al. [ 75],
LogParser-LLM [213]).
Classic and still common: GA and PA (but frequency-biased).The most widely used metrics remain
Grouping Accuracy (GA)andParsing Accuracy (PA)because they are simple and comparable across studies [4,
20, 73]. GA evaluates whether each line is assigned to the correct event group, while PA evaluates whether the
per-line template exactly matches the oracle [20, 73]. However, both aremessage-levelaverages: frequent templates
dominate, so a parser can score high while failing on the long tail or under drift [ 64, 75]. They can also blur
“grouping is correct” versus “placeholder boundaries are correct”, motivating template-level complements [57, 64].
Increasingly adopted for robustness: FGA and FTA.To mitigate frequency bias, many recent parsers
reportFGA(F1 of Grouping Accuracy) andFTA(F1 of Template Accuracy) astemplate-levelcomplements to
GA/PA [64, 75, 186, 213]. FGA scores correctnessper template group(then aggregates via precision/recall-style
F1), making rare-template fragmentation/merging visible. FTA is stricter because it also requires thetemplate text
(static tokens and placeholders) to match, exposing boundary errors that GA/PA can hide [57, 64]. In practice,
reporting {GA,PA}+{FGA,FTA} gives both backward comparability and clearer evidence of template-inventory
recovery [64, 75].
Diagnostics and niche variants: ED/LCS, GGD/PGD, PTA/RTA, F1, and RI.Several studies addEdit
Distance (ED)and/orLongest Common Subsequence (LCS)between predicted and oracle templates to
quantifyhow farnear-misses are (useful for diagnosing systematic boundary mistakes), but these should be
treated as secondary signals instead of standalone correctness measures [4, 20, 73]. Some papers further introduce
GGD/PGDto diagnoseerror modes: whether mistakes stem mainly from over-merging/over-splitting (grouping

granularity) or from static↔variable boundary mismatches in templates [213]. A few prompting-based parsers
reportPTA/RTAas template-level precision/recall variants that emphasize strict template recovery (often stricter
than PA) [123, 188]. When parsing is formulated as token labeling,F1evaluates whether parameter boundaries
are identified correctly [144]. And for clustering-style evaluation,RI(Rand Index) measures pairwise agreement
of the predicted vs. oracle partition (together vs. apart) [ 42, 164]. Even within log parsing, direct cross-paper
comparison remains limited because studies differ in datasets, online versus offline settings, oracle template
definitions, grouping policies, and which metrics they report.
6 Downstream Log Analysis Tasks
Feedback loop: cache, updated templates/embeddings, retrieved similar incidents
Direct raw-text / event-sequence text to LLM
STAGE 2 - Log Representation
(machine-consumable features) STAGE 3 - LLM-enabled
STAGE 1 - Partition into STAGE 4 - Action for
A) Symbolic sequence:
(skip explicit features)
sessions / windows
event IDs / templates
event counts, n-grams,parameter statistics
B) Feature vector:
modules/ threads/ processes
Task Inference
timeline + affected
grounded evidence
· Incident report /
incident summary;
· Identifier-based:
(service/change/
handoff summary
Parsed Logs
rollback / restart /
resource reallocation
On-call / SRE
· Window-based: 3) Root Cause
(templates +
Summarization
· Trigger alertspotential failuresparameters)
ranked suspects
anomaly label /
1) Anomaly
within horizon
time-based or
count-based
windowing
· Mitigation:
key events +
componentstemplate) +
2) Failure
Prediction
request ID /
trace-span ID /
block ID
Analysis
Detection
mixed sources:
4) Log
alert
x*
..
o
C) Embedding-based
via pooling/attentionsequence embedding
Classic: token-based
event embeddingLLM: contextual
embeddings
Fig. 5. A common workflow for LLM-enabled downstream log analysis.
Downstream log analysis aims to turn high-volume log evidence into actionable signals. Many pipelines
operate on parsed templates and parameters, while some LLM-based approaches work directly with raw, lightly
normalized, or embedded log windows. In this survey, we focus on four representative tasks:anomaly detection
(flagging abnormal log sequences or windows),failure prediction(forecasting failures within a future time
horizon),root cause analysis(identifying the most likely cause or component of an incident and justifying
it with evidence), andlog summarization(compressing large log windows into concise, operator-friendly
summaries).
Challenges motivating the shift toward LLMs.Historically, operators often relied on keyword search and
manual inspection, which is fragile under message vocabulary variation and scale [ 47]. Rule-based analytics
can be efficient but are brittle under format drift and hard to adapt across systems, especially when log formats
and templates evolve over time [21, 46]. Learning-based detectors and predictors improve automation, yet they
often depend on careful feature engineering, stable parsing/representation choices, and sufficient labeled data,
and can still be sensitive to log evolution [118]. They may also struggle to provide human-friendly explanations,

motivating more interpretable and interaction-oriented log analysis workflows [68, 92]. In the LLM era, researchers
increasingly leverage models’ semantic generalization to (i) better tolerate heterogeneous phrasing and evolution,
and (ii) generate explanation-oriented outputs that help operators understand not onlywhathappened but also
why[20, 42].
A common workflow: partition→ representation→ task inference→ action.In practice, downstream
analysis is rarely performed on a monolithic log file. Instead, logs are firstpartitionedinto sessions or windows
to separate mixed sources (modules/threads/processes) into coherent log sequences. Partitioning can be driven
by identifiers (e.g., request ID, trace/span ID, block ID) or by time- or count-based windowing when identifiers
are unavailable. After sequences are formed, a pipeline may parse events, derive embeddings or otherlog
representations, select salient context, or directly prompt an LLM, and then apply task-specific approaches to
trigger alerts, rank suspected causes, predict upcoming failures, or summarize incidents for operators. Figure 5
summarizes this workflow and highlights where LLMs are commonly integrated to improve failure perception,
diagnosis, and operator-facing actions.
We organize the rest of this section following the workflow in Figure 5. Section 6.1 discusseslog representation,
which largely determines what any downstream model can learn or infer. Sections 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5 then cover
four representative LLM-enabled tasks:anomaly detection,failure prediction,root cause analysis, andlog
summarization.
6.1 Log Representation
Given a sessionized (or windowed) log sequence, typically a sequence of parsed events/templates with optional
parameters and timestamps,log representationmaps it into machine-consumable features that preserve task-relevant signals while suppressing nuisance variability. Depending on the downstream task, the representation
can be (i) a discrete symbolic sequence (event IDs/templates), (ii) a fixed-length feature vector (counts, n-grams,
parameter statistics), or (iii) a continuous embedding sequence or sequence embedding produced by neural
encoders. Logs contribute information that is difficult to replace with metrics, traces, or code alone: symptom
wording, exception/error text, component-local execution narratives, chronological evidence trails, and sparse
but informative runtime context. Representation choice is also a major source of cross-paper incomparability
because studies differ in whether they use raw messages, parsed templates, event IDs, parameters, embeddings,
or direct prompt inputs. Figure 6 illustrates a log window and how it can be mapped into different representation
types.
Traditional representations: statistical, parameter-aware, and semantic sequence features.A common
starting point isstatistics-basedrepresentation, which converts each log sequence into a feature vector by
counting event occurrences (bag-of-events) or short patterns such as n-grams. This view is compact and efficient,
but it can lose semantic similarity between differently worded events and captures ordering only shallowly. A
closely related line isparameter-awarerepresentation, which augments event statistics with counts/patterns
over extracted parameter values (IDs, paths, codes), useful when diagnosis depends onwhich entities/values
appear, but potentially brittle under drift and high-cardinality parameters.
The most widely usedsemanticrepresentations in traditional pipelines build embeddings from the message/template text. A typical workflow is to map each token in a log event to a word embedding (e.g., word2vec
algorithm [112]), aggregate token vectors into anevent embedding(often by weighted averaging), and then
compose asequence embeddingby pooling or concatenating embeddings across events in the window. This family
is attractive because it provides a continuous semantic space while remaining lightweight.
LLM-era representations: reuse classic features or switch to contextual encoders.Many recent LLM-based
log analytics approaches still reuse classic representations (event-count vectors, parameter statistics, n-grams, or
word-embedding-based features) as inputs to downstream models because they are cheap, stable, and compatible

Raw logs (window)
10:12:03.120 INFO OrderSvc recv request id=42
10:12:03.128 INFO OrderSvc GET /api/orders?id=42
10:12:03.311 WARN DB timeout conn=7 (3000ms)
10:12:03.540 INFO OrderSvc retry query attempt=1
10:12:03.905 ERROR Gateway upstream failed code=504
Parsed events(templates + parameters)
S=⟨(ei, ti, pi)⟩
e1:recv request id=*p1={id=42}
e2:GET /api/orders?id=*p2={id=42}
e3:timeout conn=* (#ms)p3={conn=7,ms=3000}
e4:retry query attempt=*p4={attempt=1}
e5:upstream failed code=*p5={code=504}
parsing
Log window
Word embeddings
token vectors→
avg / TF-IDF
Classic counts
bag-of-events / n-grams
param statistics
Contextual encoder
BERT/SBERT/log enc.
event embedding
Direct LLM
raw window text
prompt & reason
Word-avg event embsz(w)i
z(w)3 =avg(timeout,conn,ms)
≈[0.12,−0.03,0.44]
(context-free tokens)
Vector featuresx
counts over templates
[c(e1), . . . , c(e5)]=[1,1,1,1,1]
+ param stats (e.g.,μ(ms)=3000)
Contextual event embsz(c)i
embed full template+params
z(c)3 ≈[0.08,0.51,−0.11]
(context-sensitive)
Prompt output
Likely DB timeout caused 504.
Retries observed (attempt=1).
Downstream tasks
AD / FP / RCA / Sum
Fig. 6. An illustrative overview of log window representations: raw logs are parsed into templates and parameters, then
mapped to (i) classic feature vectors, (ii) context-free word-averaged embeddings, (iii) contextual event embeddings, or (iv)
direct prompt-based LLM outputs. Numeric vectors are schematic to highlight different representations.
with existing monitoring pipelines. In these hybrid designs, LLMs may serve only as an auxiliary component
(e.g., to improve parsing quality or provide explanations), while the anomaly detector/predictor still relies on
traditional features and machine-learning models.
At the same time, many recent pipelines adoptcontextual event embeddings. Instead of averaging context-free
word vectors, they embed each entire log event with a pretrained encoder. The main advantage is robustness:
contextual encoders model word order and compositional meaning within an event, and they can assign different
representations to the same token across different contexts (which is common in fast-evolving software logs) [30,
125]. As a result, semantically equivalent events with heterogeneous phrasing tend to stay closer in the embedding
space, while subtle boundary or wording changes are less likely to break downstream models, a property that is
particularly useful under drift, long-tail patterns, and limited supervision.
In practice, the workflow is lightweight. Each parsed event (often the template text, optionally concatenated
with selected parameters) is converted to a short input string and encoded with a contextual model such as
BERT [24] and Sentence-BERT [135], or with log-oriented encoders (e.g., PreLog [74] and OWL [42]) to obtain a
fixed-lengthevent embedding. For sequence-level tasks, event embeddings within a session/window are then
aggregated (e.g., pooling/attention or a lightweight sequential model) into awindow representation. Downstream
modules use these representations either for (i) similarity-based retrieval/matching (nearest-neighbor search for
related events/windows) or (ii) training detectors/predictors for anomaly detection and failure prediction, often
with improved tolerance to wording variation compared to word-embedding pipelines.
Unified log representations via large-scale pretraining.Beyond “using a general-purpose encoder, ” BigLog [165]
advocatesunsupervised large-scale pre-trainingto learn aunifiedrepresentation space for logs. The core idea
is to pretrain on massive, heterogeneous log corpora so that a single encoder can produce transferable embed-dings across systems and log styles, reducing the reliance on per-system feature engineering or task-specific
representation tuning. This perspective is especially relevant in LLM-era pipelines where the bottleneck often
shifts from model capacity torepresentation compatibility: when logs change frequently or when operators need
cross-service retrieval and correlation, a unified embedding space enables (i) more reliable similarity search
over historical windows, (ii) easier cross-system transfer/bootstrapping under limited labels, and (iii) a common

interface that multiple downstream tasks (anomaly detection, failure diagnosis, summarization) can share. In
practice, BigLog-style pretraining can be viewed as a middle ground between “classic features” and “prompt
on raw text”: it keeps inference efficient (fixed-length embeddings) while improving semantic robustness and
portability at scale.
Skipping explicit features: direct raw-text or event-sequence text as input.Finally, some LLM-based
approaches partially or fully bypass handcrafted feature construction by feeding an LLM theraw log window(or a
text form of theevent sequence) and prompting it to perform the downstream task directly. This design can preserve
richer context and enable explanation-oriented outputs, but it introduces new constraints: long contexts require
careful windowing, summarization, or retrieval to control noise and cost, and online deployment may demand
additional compression or caching mechanisms. Overall, representation choices trade off efficiency, robustness,
and fidelity. Thus, many recent approaches combine compact classic features with contextual embeddings or
selective raw-text reasoning, depending on task requirements and operational budgets.
6.2 Anomaly Detection
6.2.1 Task definition.Log anomaly detection identifiesunexpectedorundesiredsystem behavior patterns from
logs. Such anomalies typically indicate potential faults, misconfigurations, performance regressions, or other
conditions that violate the expected normal execution, and thus serve as early signals for reliability triage.
Given a sessionized (or windowed) log sequenceS=⟨(e i,t i,p i)⟩n
i=1, whereei is a parsed event/template (or
the raw log message),ti is the timestamp, andpi are optional parameters, the task outputs either (i) an anomaly
scorea(S) or a binary labely∈{ 0, 1} indicating whether the sequence is abnormal, and optionally (ii) localized
evidence such as suspicious positionsI⊆{1,...,n}(or key templates/snippets) to support debugging.
In practice, anomaly detection is usuallyreactive: it flags abnormal states or behavior patterns in observed logs
(often in unsupervised or weakly supervised settings), without necessarily predicting whether/when a concrete
failure will occur.
6.2.2 LLM-based Approaches for Anomaly Detection.Table 6–7 summarizes LLM-based anomaly detection
studies. Across these works, a common pipeline is: (i) partition logs into sessions/windows, (ii) encode each
sequence into a representation (templates, embeddings, or raw text), (iii) compute an anomaly signal (score/label),
and (iv) optionally returnevidence(highlighted lines, retrieved neighbors, or explanations) to support triage.
Existing approaches mainly differ along four design axes:(1) representation interface(parsed templates vs.
raw text),(2) supervision setting(fully supervised with both normal/anomalous labels vs. semi-supervised/oneclass settings that train mostly or only onnormaldata, vs. unsupervised settings),(3) adaptation/training
strategy(fine-tuning/prompt-tuning vs. keeping the LLM frozen and using it in a training-free manner), and(4)
inference form(discriminative classification, likelihood/perplexity scoring, prompting/ICL, retrieval, or agentic
reasoning). Notably, prompting/in-context learning (ICL) is largely orthogonal to supervision, and “training”
is not synonymous with “supervision”: (i) many methodstrainmodels without using task labels (e.g., further
pretraining or contrastive learning on related unlabeled logs/corpora), and (ii) some methods aretraining-free
but still supervised at inference time by using labeled exemplars as demonstrations in ICL. Note that boundaries
are not strict: many systems combine multiple mechanisms (e.g., encoder embeddings + prompting, or retrieval +
generation).
Discriminative and representation-learning encoders.A large body of work uses pretrained encoders
(typically BERT-like) to map log events or event sequences into embeddings, followed by a classifier or sequence
model for anomaly prediction. Representative examples that operate on parsed templates and learn discriminative
decision boundaries include HitAnomaly [55], SwissLog [80], and HilBERT [56]. Several studies adapt or optimize
the encoder/sequence modeling pipeline, such as BERT-Log [ 14], Prog-BERT-LSTM [147], and the semantic

Table 6. Summary of LLM-based anomaly detection studies organized by task category. (continued in Table 7)
Paper Supervised? Train? Dataset(s) evaluated Parsing? Metric(s) Base Model(s)
Discriminative & Representation Learning (Encoder-based)
HitAnomaly [55] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, OpenStack Yes F1 BERT
SwissLog [80] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL Yes F1 BERT
Ott et al. [118] Semi-Sup Yes OpenStack Yes F1 BERT
LogBert [40] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 BERT
NeuralLog [71] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, TB, Spirit No F1 BERT
BERT-Log [14] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL Yes F1 BERT-110M
LogST [210] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS Yes F1 Sentence-BERT
Prog-BERT-LSTM [147] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 BERT
HilBERT [56] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL Yes F1 BERT
LogBP-LORA [48] Supervised Yes BGL, Thunderbird Yes F1 BERT-base
LogDAPT [211] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 BERT
LogADSBERT [52] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, Hadoop, Open-Stack
Yes F1 Sentence-BERT
Karlsen et al. [67] Unsup No ECML, CSIC, Access Yes F1 DistilRoBERTa
FastLogAD [90] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 ELECTRA
LAnoBERT [77] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdNo F1, AUC BERT
Corbelle et al. [18] Supervised Yes HDFS Yes F1 BERT-base
Zhou et al. [218] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL Yes F1 BERT
LogELECTRA [191] Semi-Sup Yes BGL, Thunderbird, SpiritNo F1 ELECTRA
LogFiT [2] Semi-Sup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdNo F1 BERT
LogRoBERTa [159] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL No F1 RoBERTa
ADALog [127] Unsup Yes BGL, Thunderbird, SpiritNo F1 DistilBERT
Thali et al. [166] Supervised Yes SWaT, Morris ICS No F1 BERT
APT-LLM [7] Semi-Sup Yes Android, Linux, Win Yes AUC BERT
Entezami et al. [29] Supervised Yes KDD99, UNSW, CICIDS Yes F1 BERT
AnomalyExplainerBot [5] Supervised Yes HDFS Yes F1 RoBERTa
Horváth et al. [51] Supervised Yes BGL, Thunderbird Yes F1, Acc LLaMA
Generative Forecasting & Next-Token Prediction (Decoder-based)
LogGPT (BigData) [168] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdNo F1 GPT-2
LogSense [154] Semi-Sup Yes - Yes - GPT-2
PreLog [74] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, Spirit No F1 FLAN-T5 (140M)
Bogdan et al. [9] Supervised Yes ECU Comm. Logs Yes Top-k Qwen2-0.4B
LogLM [94] Supervised Yes BGL, Spirit Yes F1 LLaMA-2-7B
NLPLog [62] Supervised Yes NLPLog Yes F1 LLaMA-2-7B
hierarchical compaction + BERT-based detection by Corbelle et al. [18]. Other works emphasize robustness and
transfer across systems and unstable log vocabularies. For instance, Ott et al. study robustness and transferability
with pretrained language models [118], and APT-LLM applies embedding-based detection to advanced persistent
threats in cyber logs [7]. Some papers explicitly investigate LLM-assistedparsing + embeddingpipelines before
detection (e.g., Zhou et al. [218]), while others evaluate broader log/security settings with encoder backbones (e.g.,
Thali et al. [166] and Entezami et al. [29]). Finally, as LLM-era anomaly detection expands beyond classic system
logs, recent large-scale studies also include LLaMA-family backbones in supervised pipelines (e.g., Horváth et
al. [51]) and explanation-oriented add-ons (e.g., AnomalyExplainerBot [5]).

Table 7. Summary of LLM-based anomaly detection studies organized by task category. (continued from Table 6.)
Paper Supervised? Train? Dataset(s) evaluated Parsing? Metric(s) Base Model(s)
Prompt-Based & In-Context Learning (Zero/Few-shot)
LogPrompt (IJCNN) [205] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL No F1, Acc BERT-large
LogPrompt (ICPC) [92] Unsup No HDFS, BGL Yes F1 ChatGPT
Setu et al. [106] Supervised Yes Apache, BGL, HDFS Yes F1, AUC GPT-3
LogGPT (HPCC) [129] Supervised No BGL, Spirit Yes F1 GPT-3.5-turbo
Egersdoerfer et al. [27] Supervised No Lustre No F1 GPT-3.5-turbo
Owl [42] New Model Yes BGL, Spirit Yes F1 Owl (LLaMA)
Fariha et al. [32] Unsup Yes HDFS Yes F1 GPT-3.5-turbo
VMFT-LAD [143] Semi-Sup Yes VM/Server failures Yes AUC GPT-3.5-turbo
FLEXLOG [44] Supervised Yes ADFA, SynHDFS Yes F1 Mistral-22B
CloudAnoAgent [221] Supervised No CloudAnoBench No Acc Gemini-2.5
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
RAPID [115] Semi-Sup No HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdNo F1 BERT
LogRag [206] Semi-Sup Yes BGL, Spirit Yes Prec, Rec, F1 GPT-3.5-turbo,
Mistral-7B-Instruct
RAGLog [121] Semi-Sup No BGL, Thunderbird No F1 RAG Model
XRAGLog [202] Semi-Sup No HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 GPT-3.5
Hybrid & Collaborative (Small Model + Large Model)
LLMeLog [45] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdYes F1 ChatGPT + BERT
LogFormer [41] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, TB, GAIA No F1 S-BERT + ChatGPT
CLogLLM [137] Unsup Yes HDFS, BGL, ThunderbirdNo F1 Qwen + GPT-3.5
LogLLM [39] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, TB, Liberty No F1 BERT + LLaMA-3
AdaptiveLog [101] Supervised Yes BGL, Thunderbird No F1 BERT + ChatGPT
LogRules [57] Supervised Yes BGL, Spirit No F1 GPT-4o + LLaMA-3
LogADRef [89] Supervised Yes BGL, HDFS, Spirit, TB Yes F1 RoBERTa + GPT2
SemiRALD [158] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL Yes F1 ChatGPT + BERT
LogSynergy [155] Supervised Yes Three production
datasets, BGL, Thunder-bird, Spirit
Yes F1 ChatGPT-4o
CLSLog [183] Supervised Yes BGL, Zookeeper No F1 BERT + Qwen
LEMAD [61] Semi-Sup Yes State Grid Corp Yes F1 BERT + GPT-4o
CoLA [220] Supervised Yes HDFS, BGL, Spirit Yes F1 LLaMA-3 + GPT-4o
LUK [98] Supervised Yes BGL, Spirit, ThunderbirdYes F1 GPT-3.5 + Expert
SemiSMAC [157] Supervised Yes BGL, HDFS, Spirit Yes F1 GPT-4-turbo
Agentic, Reasoning & Neuro-Symbolic Frameworks
Audit-LLM [151] Unsup No CERT r4.2/5.2 No F1 GPT-3.5 (Agent)
WebNorm [88] Semi-Sup No TrainTicket, NiceFish Yes F1 GPT-3.5 (Agent)
LogRESP-Agent [76] Semi-Sup Yes EVTX-ATTACK No F1, TPR Gemini-2.0-Flash
Song et al. [153] Supervised Yes CERT v6.2 No F1 ChatGLM-6B
SHIELD [156] Supervised Yes DARPA-E3, ATLASv2 Yes Prec DeepSeek-R1
LogReasoner [100] Supervised Yes BGL, Spirit No F1 Qwen2.5-1.5B
Data Generation, Benchmarks & Visions
Karlsen et al. [68] Supervised Yes CSIC, Thunderbird, BGLYes F1 RoBERTa/GPT
LogEval [20] Supervised No BGL, Thunderbird No F1 GPT-4
AD-LLM [193] Semi-Sup Yes News, Reviews, Spam No AUC LLaMA-3/GPT-4o
AnomalyGen [81] Supervised Yes Hadoop, HDFS Yes F1 GPT-4o

Masked-LM and self-/semi-supervised normality modeling.A closely related family modelsnormallog
patterns using self-supervised objectives and flags deviations as anomalies, which is well-suited to rare-anomaly
regimes. LogBert [40] and LAnoBERT [77] exemplify masked-language-model training on normal sequences,
producing anomaly scores via reconstruction/prediction errors. Recent variants continue this direction with
alternative backbones and training strategies, such as LogELECTRA [191], LogFiT [2], and ADALog [127]. FastLogAD [90] further augments semi-supervised learning by generating pseudo anomalies to strengthen discrimination.
In practice, these methods often reduce label requirements but still rely on careful sessionization/windowing and
calibration to control false positives across evolving software versions.
Reducing reliance on log parsing: from templates to raw text.Because parsing errors and format drift can
directly harm downstream detectors, multiple works explicitly minimize or remove template parsing. NeuralLog [71] studies anomaly detection without conventional log parsing, and LogRoBERTa [159] further reduces
parser reliance via hybrid language modeling. In addition, several prompt- or LLM-assisted pipelines still use
lightweight normalization (e.g., regex-based variable masking) as a middle ground between full template parsing
and raw text, especially when deploying at scale under frequent log evolution.
Decoder-style generative forecasting and likelihood-based scoring.Instead of classification, decoder LMs
treat anomaly detection as alanguage modelingproblem: a sequence is anomalous if it is hard to predict under a
model trained (or adapted) on normal behavior. LogGPT [168] is a representative GPT-style next-token prediction
approach, while PreLog [74] explores a pretrained model tailored for log analytics tasks (including anomaly
detection) using a compact generative backbone. Instruction-centric systems also evaluate anomaly detection
within a broader log analysis interface (e.g., LogLM [94] and knowledge-augmented adaptation in NLPLog [62]).
Beyond system logs, “Good Enough to Learn” investigates anomaly detection in ECU logs under unreliable labels
with small LMs [9], highlighting a practical trend toward smaller, cheaper generative models for edge/embedded
scenarios.
Prompting and in-context learning for training-free detection and interpretation.With instruction-tuned
LLMs, several works bypass explicit model training and instead prompt an LLM to classify sequences or explain
suspicious patterns. LogPrompt-style prompt engineering emphasizes interpretability and online usage [92, 93],
while feasibility studies explore ChatGPT-style models for anomaly detection under different settings and log
sources [27, 106, 129]. Some lines treat LLMs as anoperations foundation modelthat supports multiple tasks,
including anomaly detection, under a unified interface (e.g., OWL [42]). At the benchmark level, large-context
prompting is also evaluated in broad suites (e.g., LogEval [20]), clarifying how far prompting alone can go without
task-specific training.
Retrieval-augmented detection: comparing against a memory of normality.Retrieval-based methods treat
anomaly detection asnearest-neighbor comparisonin an embedding space of normal sequences and often provide
evidence by returning similar historical cases. RAPID [115] embeds normal windows using a pretrained encoder
and flags anomalies by distance/neighborhood structure, while RAGLog [121] frames detection through retrieval-augmented generation by retrieving similar normal cases and judging the target’s consistency. XRAGLog [202]
further targets resource efficiency and context awareness in RAG-style pipelines. This family is especially
compatible with semi-supervised settings (normal-only data) and naturally supports operator-facing justifications
through retrieved exemplars.
Hybrid and collaborative frameworks: small models for scoring, LLMs for enrichment, verification, or
rules.Many practical designs combine a lightweight detector with an LLM component that improves robustness
or interpretability. LLMeLog [45] enriches log events with LLM-derived semantics before training a smaller
classifier. LogFormer [41] combines representation learning with LLM assistance, and LogLLM [ 39] explores
joint use of encoders with larger LMs. AdaptiveLog [101] explicitly frames anomaly detection as collaboration

between large and small models, while CoLA [ 220] studies model collaboration at scale with multiple LLMs.
Knowledge and control signals are also injected via rules or domain constraints (e.g., LogRules [57]), and tuning
procedures aim to stabilize performance (e.g., SemiSMAC [ 157] and SemiRALD [ 158]). Finally, cross-system
generalization and “new system” adaptation are increasingly important, motivating transfer-focused designs
such as LogSynergy [155].
Agentic and multi-step reasoning for complex security/incident contexts.A growing line of work frames
anomaly detection as a multi-step investigation that iteratively retrieves context, applies tools, and produces
both predictions and narratives. Examples include multi-agent collaboration for threat/anomaly scenarios (AuditLLM [151]), consistency-based detection with evidence building (WebNorm [88]), and recursive/agentic pipelines
for context-aware detection and response (LogRESP-Agent [ 76]). Related systems emphasize turning alerts
into operator-facing intelligence (SHIELD [156]) or improving reasoning structure and controllability (LogRea-soner [100]), while insider-threat anomaly detection appears as another domain where agentic reasoning is
natural (Song et al. [ 153]). Agentic methods can improve interpretability and reduce analyst workload, but
introduce additional latency/cost and require careful guardrails for reliable deployment.
Benchmarks and data generation.As the space expands, benchmarks and data-centric efforts have become
important for fair comparison and stress-testing. Karlsen et al. benchmark LLMs for log analysis tasks including
anomaly detection [68], and LogEval provides a broader benchmark suite for LLM-based log analysis [20]. Beyond
logs, AD-LLM benchmarks LLM-based anomaly detection across multiple text anomaly domains [193], helping
disentangle what improvements come from stronger backbones versus prompting/retrieval. Complementarily,
AnomalyGen [81] explores LLM-driven generation of anomalous log sequences, reflecting an emerging direction
where synthetic anomalies and augmentation are used to improve coverage of rare patterns and unstable logs.
Across LLM-based anomaly detection studies, the main shift is not just higher accuracy. It is also a move
toward treating anomalies asevidence-grounded inconsistencieswith expected behavior, such as deviations
from retrieved “normal” cases, violations of explicit rules, or unusually high calibrated anomaly scores. The
strongest systems therefore constrain LLMs with stable interfaces (templates, embeddings, or normalized text)
and use them mainly to explain, verify, or enrich lightweight detectors. LLMs do not remove the ambiguity
of what counts as an anomaly. Instead, they shift effort from feature design to normality curation, context
selection (windowing or retrieval), and operational guardrails that control false alarms and cost. This makes
hybrid, evidence-driven workflows a practical deployment pattern.
6.3 Failure Prediction
6.3.1 Task definition.Log-based failure prediction is a proactive early-warning task: it forecasts whether the
system (or a component) will experience afuture failurewithin a horizon, so operators can take preventive actions
(e.g., mitigation, rollback, or resource reallocation) before the system enters an unrecoverable or user-visible
failure state. Given logs observed up to the current time t (often represented as a session/windowSt−L:t or a
prefix of an ongoing session), the task outputs a probabilityPr(failure in[t,t+H]) (or a binary label) for a future
horizonH, and sometimes additional signals such as predicted time-to-failure or early-warning decisions under
different lead-time budgets.
Compared with anomaly detection, failure prediction is explicitlyforward-lookingand tied to an operational
failure definition (e.g., crash, outage, severe SLO violation, incident ticket). Its difficulty depends on the prediction
horizon: useful early signals in logs may be weak, sparse, and distributed across components or long time ranges,
while short-horizon signals can be clearer but less actionable. Depending on the environment, prediction may
focus on (i) failures of similar components in homogeneous systems (sequence-centric modeling), or (ii) failures
driven by interactions among heterogeneous components (leveraging cross-component correlations).

6.3.2 LLM-based Approaches for Failure Prediction.Compared with anomaly detection, failure prediction must
explicitly optimize lead time and horizon awareness: a useful predictor should raise early warnings sufficiently
ahead of a failure event while controlling false alarms. Consequently, papers often report ranking/probabilistic
metrics (e.g., AUC) and sometimes assess whether the model can provide actionable context (time-to-failure,
likely causes).
Generative prediction of crash events and causes.CrashEventLLM casts failure prediction as a text generation problem: given preceding logs, the model predicts forthcoming crash-related information (e.g., time
and cause) using an instruction-tuned LLaMA backbone, and evaluates generation quality with ROUGE-style
metrics. [114] This formulation is attractive when operators want human-consumable explanations, but it also
raises a methodological question: lexical-overlap metrics (e.g., ROUGE) may not faithfully reflect correctness of
timestamps/causal factors, so future work may benefit from structured evaluation (e.g., exact match on failure
type/time bins, and evidence grounding).
Discriminative early warning from language-model representations.FALL proposes a language-model-based detector that outputs an early-warning score (reported with AUC-style evaluation) to detect imminent
failures in large-scale systems. [60] In this design, the PLM (e.g., ELECTRA-style encoders) provides a robust
representation of evolving log patterns, and the predictor focuses on separating pre-failure prefixes from normal
operation. Conceptually, this parallels semi-supervised anomaly detection, but with labels aligned to future failure
windows (pre-failure vs. non-pre-failure), making horizon definition and data leakage control (e.g., avoiding
post-failure artifacts) especially important.
Leveraging operational context beyond application logs.Combining LLMs and shell logs for backup-failure
prediction highlights another practical pattern: operational failures are often best predicted using heterogeneous
telemetry, where shell commands, job traces, and system events provide context that is not present in application
logs alone. [35] Here, an LLM can serve as a semantic integrator for noisy, free-form operational traces, potentially
improving feature robustness and interpretability.
From anomaly detection to proactive fault tolerance.VMFT-LAD (Virtual Machine Proactive Fault Tolerance
Using Log-Based Anomaly Detection) connects anomaly scoring with proactive mitigation for virtualized envi-ronments, treating detected abnormal patterns as early signals to trigger fault-tolerance actions (e.g., proactive
migration or resource adjustment).[143] Although framed around anomaly detection, the operational goal aligns
with failure prediction: catch the system early enough to intervene. This line suggests a promising integration
point: LLM-based detectors could be paired with decision policies (rule-based or learned) that explicitly optimize
lead time, cost, and risk.
The current failure prediction literature using LLMs is still sparse and heterogeneous. Most works either (i)
reuse LLM representations for discriminative early warning, or (ii) exploit instruction-following to generate
human-readable failure explanations. A key open challenge is establishing consistent evaluation that jointly
measures predictive quality, timeliness, and actionability, under realistic constraints such as log evolution,
partial observability, and cross-component dependency.
6.4 Root Cause Analysis / Failure Diagnosis
6.4.1 Task definition.Root cause analysis (RCA) / Failure diagnosis aims to identify the most likely underlying
cause(s) of an observed incident and provide actionable, operator-facing evidence. The goal is not only to name a
suspect (e.g., component/change/event type), but also tojustifyit with grounded signals so that time-to-mitigation
can be reduced. In this survey, multimodal RCA studies are discussed in this subsection when runtime logs are
used directly or indirectly as part of the operational evidence.

Given an incident context (e.g., an anomalous time window or a set of correlated sessions), inputs commonly
include (i) logs from multiple components/services within a time range, and optionally (ii) service topology/dependency information, deployment/change metadata, and alerts/metrics describing the incident. The output is
typically a ranked list of candidate causes (top-k suspects), together with supporting evidence such as representa-tive templates/snippets, affected components, and (when available) an explanatory chain linking symptoms to
causes. Logs are especially useful in RCA because they preserve chronological symptom evidence, error/exception
semantics, component-local context, and operator-facing evidence chains that connect observations to candidate
causes. The “Dataset(s) type” column in Table 8 reports whether each RCA study uses logs alone or combines
logs with other operational artifacts, making the scope of multimodal inclusion explicit.
6.4.2 LLM-based Approaches for Root Cause Analysis.Table 8 summarizes LLM-based root cause analysis (RCA)
and closely related failure diagnosis studies. Overall, these works share a common goal: given heterogeneous
operational evidence (logs and often metrics/traces, code, tickets, or knowledge bases), produce an actionable
RCA output such as(i)a root-cause description or reason,(ii)localization to components/configurations, and
sometimes(iii)remediation guidance and supporting evidence. Across studies, the main design differences are(1)
how the LLM is used(prompting/ICL vs. agentic tool use vs. trained task model),(2) what external context is
integrated(repositories, databases, SOPs, graphs, knowledge bases), and(3) what the output is optimized for
(free-form explanation vs. structured labels/locations vs. resolutions).
Prompting and in-context learning for incident RCA.A pragmatic line treats RCA as a text understanding
and summarization problem and relies on prompting/ICL to map incident artifacts to root-cause statements.
Chen et al. [16] perform automatic RCA for cloud incidents by consuming multiple incident signals (e.g., error
logs, stack traces, socket metrics) and outputting both explanations and categories, evaluated with F1. Similarly,
Zhang et al. [209] study ICL-based root causing for cloud incidents using incident metadata (e.g., title/summary)
and report a suite of generation-oriented metrics. In privacy- or token-limited settings, InsightAI [28] frames
RCA as interactive diagnosis over large private logs, producing operator-facing artifacts (e.g., flame graphs
and Q&A-style assistance) and evaluating quality with F1. These ICL-style systems are attractive due to low
engineering overhead (no task-specific training required), but their performance is often bounded by context
selection, prompt robustness, and the fidelity of the provided evidence.
Agentic and tool-augmented RCA for complex systems.When RCA requires multi-step investigation (e.g.,
correlating signals, fetching relevant traces, querying databases, or checking code ownership), many works
move from single-pass prompting toagenticpipelines. RCAgent [ 179] is representative: it uses autonomous
agents and tool augmentation over logs and external artifacts (e.g., databases and code repositories) to produce
root causes, solutions, evidence, and responsibilities, and evaluates with multiple semantic similarity metrics.
OPENRCA [189] explicitly benchmarks the ability of agentic LLM systems to locate root causes from observability
data (logs/metrics/traces), emphasizing accuracy on components and reasons. Other methods specialize in
structured outputs and fine-grained localization: TAMO [208] targets cloud-native RCA with tool-assisted agents
over multi-modality observations and evaluates localization via Acc@k alongside fault-type classification metrics,
while Flow-of-Action [124] incorporates SOP guidance to improve location/type accuracy. RCLAgent [203] explore
multi-agent recursion-of-thought for microservice localization, reporting ranking-style metrics (Recall@k, MRR).
MicroRCA-Agent [163] further integrates an anomaly-identification stage (training an Isolation Forest) before
agentic RCA, reflecting a common practical pattern:small models for fast screening, agents for evidence-driven
explanation and attribution. Overall, agentic approaches tend to improve completeness and traceability of RCA, but
introduce added latency/cost and require careful guardrails to avoid brittle tool use or overconfident narratives.
Knowledge-, graph-, and code-augmented RCA.Another prominent direction strengthens RCA by explicitly
modeling dependencies and injecting structured knowledge. ForenSiX [58] combines context extraction with a data

Table 8. Summary of LLM-based root cause analysis and failure diagnosis studies organized by category.
Paper Train? Dataset(s) type Output Metric(s) Base Model(s)
Prompting & In-Context Learning (ICL) for RCA / Diagnosis
Chen et al. [16] Yes log, traces, metrics Explanation; category Micro and macro F1 GPT-4
Shan et al. [145] No Log Root-cause configuration
location
Accuracy; FP GPT-4
Zhang et al. [209] No Incident title, Inci-dent summary (logs,
traces, etc.)
Root cause ROUGE-L, ROUGE-1, METEOR, GLEU, BERTScore,
Nubia
GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4
InsightAI [28] No Log Flame graph; user Q&A
chatbot
F1 GPT-4o
ScalaLog [201] No Log Root-cause description F1 GPT-3.5-turbo
Agentic & Tool-Augmented RCA (Multi-step Reasoning)
RCAgent [179] No Log, codebase Root causes, solutions, evidence, responsibilities
METEOR, NUBIA,
BLEURT, BARTScore,
EmbScore
Vicuna-13B-V1.5-16K,
GTE-LARGE (embedding)
OPENRCA [189] No Log, traces, metrics Root cause reasons and
components
Accuracy Claude 3.5
TAMO [208] Yes Log, traces, metrics Root cause localization;
fault type classification
Acc@k; MiPr, MaPr, MiRe,
MaRe, MiF1, MaF1
GPT-4
Flow-of-Action [124] No Log, traces, metricsRoot cause localization;
fault type classification
Root cause location accu-racy (LA); root cause type
accuracy (TA)
GPT-4-Turbo
RCLAgent [203] No Metric, trace log Root cause localization Recall@k; MRR Claude-3.5-sonnet
MicroRCA-Agent [163] Yes Log, traces, metrics Root-cause Top@K deepseek-v3
Knowledge / Graph / Code-Augmented Diagnosis
ForenSiX [58] No Log Context extraction, data dependency graph, diagnosis
Accuracy GPT-4o
COCA [85] No Log, codebase, trace Root-cause BLEU-4, ROUGE-1, METEOR, Semantics, Useful-ness, Exact Match, Top-K
GPT-4o
AetherLog [19] Yes Log Root-cause category prediction
F1 GPT-4o
General Log Diagnosis: Fault Type / Resolution / Understanding
LogSage [190] No Log Root causes; solutions Precision, Recall, F1 GPT-4o, Deepseek V3,
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
Herrmann et al. [50] Yes Issue description, log
files, engineer communications
Root cause description MSS MIXTRAL-8X7B
Huang et al. [53] Yes Log Fault-indicating descrip-tion; fault-indicating
parameter
Precision, Recall, F1 UniXcoder
LogLM [94] Yes Log Log-problem-resolution BLEU, ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-L
LLaMA2-7B
LogReasoner [100] Yes Log Failure type Accuracy; Weighted-F1 Qwen2.5-1.5B
Ji et al. [62] Yes Log 0/1 failure detection; fault
type
F1 LLaMA-2-7B
LogExpert [172] Yes Log, StackOverflow
issues
Executable resolution
steps, command filling
BLEU-4, ROUGE-L GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4
KnowLog [99] Yes Log Cause ranking Accuracy; Weighted F1 BERT
AdaptiveLog [101] Yes Log Failure type Recall@k bert, chatgpt
Taheri et al. [161] Yes Log Fault classification F1 RoBERTa, BigBird, Flan-T5
Benchmarks & Evaluation Suites
LogEval [20] Yes Log Fault types Accuracy; F1 GPT-4

dependency graph for network diagnostics and reports accuracy, illustrating how graph structure can constrain
reasoning and improve interpretability. COCA [85] augments RCA with code knowledge (logs + codebase + stack
traces) to produce root-cause outputs and evaluates with both lexical and human-centric measures, reflecting the
intuition that many failures are only disambiguated with code-level context. AetherLog [19] integrates knowledge
graphs with LLMs for log-based RCA category prediction, evaluated with F1. These systems highlight that,
beyond raw language ability,external structure(code, graphs, KBs) is a key ingredient for reliable RCA—especially
when symptoms are ambiguous or multiple plausible causes exist.
RCA-adjacent diagnosis: fault types, resolutions, and log understanding.Several studies expand beyond
pinpointing a cause and instead aim to complete the diagnosis loop: identifying fault types, extracting fault-indicating evidence, or generating resolutions. Huang et al. [53] extract fault-indicating descriptions and parame-ters from logs (precision/recall/F1), which can be viewed as a complementary capability that improves downstream
RCA quality by distilling salient evidence. LogExpert [172] focuses on generating executable resolution steps
grounded in external knowledge (StackOverflow), while LogLM [94] frames log analysis as instruction-following
and outputs problem resolutions, evaluated with text generation metrics. For broader diagnostic labeling, LogReasoner [100] predicts failure types, and Ji et al. [62] adapt LLMs to log analysis with interpretable domain
knowledge for failure detection and fault typing (F1). At the representation level, KnowLog [99] enhances log
understanding and supports cause ranking, and AdaptiveLog [ 101] emphasizes collaboration between small
and large models for failure-type identification (Recall@k). In telecom diagnostics, Taheri et al. [ 161] study
domain-tailored models for log mask prediction used for fault classification (F1), reinforcing the importance of
domain adaptation in operational contexts. Finally, in less standardized environments, Herrmann et al. [50] show
a case study for robotics support tickets (including logs and human communications), indicating RCA often spans
heterogeneous, partially structured evidence beyond pure log streams.
Benchmarks and evaluation: what “good RCA” means.As methods diversify, benchmark efforts help clarify
evaluation targets. LogEval [ 20] provides a broader suite for LLM-based log analysis (including fault types),
using accuracy/F1, and complements RCA-focused studies by stressing comparability and coverage. Across
the table, evaluation remains fragmented. Incident RCA often uses semantic similarity metrics. Localization
prefers rank/Acc@k. Categorization uses accuracy/F1, and resolution generation uses ROUGE/BLEU. This metric
diversity reflects different operational definitions of RCA (explanation vs. localization vs. remediation), and
suggests that future work may benefit from task-specific, operator-aligned evaluation protocols.
Across RCA studies, LLMs matter less as standalone “reasoners” and more as components that unify heteroge-neous evidence (logs, metrics, traces, code, and KBs) into a structured hypothesis with supporting traces. The
most reliable designs constrain generation through retrieval, tools, SOPs, or graphs. This shifts the core chal-lenge from modeling toevidence selection, grounding, and verifiable outputs, and makes hybrid, tool-augmented
pipelines a practical pattern.
6.5 Log Summarization
6.5.1 Task definition.Log summarizationcompresses high-volume logs into a concise, human-consumable
artifact that helps engineers quickly understandwhat happenedandwhat matters. It is commonly used for on-call
handoff, incident reports, and rapid situational awareness, where reading raw logs is too costly.
Given a set/sequence of logs associated with a session/window (often an incident window), the task outputs a
natural-language summary and/or a compact structured summary (e.g., a short timeline of key events, prominent
error templates, involved components, and extracted entities such as IDs/paths). Two common instantiations
are:extractivesummarization (select representative lines/templates) andabstractivesummarization (generate a

narrative description), often combined with grouping-by-time/component to keep summaries faithful and easy
to scan.
6.5.2 LLM-based Approaches for Log Summarization.Compared with anomaly detection and RCA, log summa-rization is one of the mostLLM-nativelog analysis tasks. Its primary deliverable is a human-readable artifact, and
usefulness depends on semantic coherence, correct attribution, and actionable compression instead of only classi-fication accuracy. Log summarization differs from generic text summarization because logs are noisy, temporally
dense, uneven in informativeness, and useful only when the summary remains faithful to concrete evidence.
Across the collected studies, LLM-based log summarization typically follows a “structure-then-generate” pattern:
(i) pre-organize raw logs (by time, component, severity, or templates), (ii) select salient evidence (representative
lines, errors, entities), and then (iii) generate an abstractive narrative or a structured synopsis (timeline, key
events, involved modules), often with faithfulness constraints.
Benchmarks and evaluation: summarization as a first-class log task.LogEval [ 20] explicitly includes
log summarizationin a broader benchmark suite for LLM-based log analysis. It evaluates summary quality
using both lexical overlap (e.g., ROUGE) and task-oriented correctness signals (e.g., accuracy/F1-style measures),
and compares strong proprietary models against a wide range of open-source chat/instruction models. This
benchmark perspective highlights two recurring issues in summarization: (i)metric mismatch—ROUGE-like
scores only partially reflect incident usefulness, and (ii)context limitation—performance depends heavily on
which log subset is provided to the model, motivating retrieval or guided selection before generation.
Guided enhancement assistants: making summaries faithful and operator-friendly.Practical summariza-tion assistants often aim to reduce hallucinations and improve scanability by enforcing intermediate structure.
logSage [96] (SAC’25) exemplifies this direction by treating summarization as an assistant workflow with guided
enhancement: instead of asking an LLM to narrate raw logs end-to-end, the system emphasizes staged processing
(e.g., evidence selection, grouping, and controlled rewriting) so that the final summary better reflects the underlying log evidence and aligns with on-call needs (handoff, incident notes, rapid situational awareness). Such
designs typically trade some linguistic freedom for higher faithfulness and better operator trust.
Instruction-based log interpretation as summarization.Some works position summarization as part of a
unifiedinstruction-followinginterface for log analysis. LogLM [ 94] transforms multiple log tasks into instruction-based interactions. For summarization-like requests, it outputs natural-language interpretations and resolutions,
and evaluates with standard generation metrics (BLEU/ROUGE variants). Similarly, Ji et al. [ 62] emphasize
interpretable domain knowledge to adapt LLMs for log analysis. Their “interpretation” outputs overlap with
summarization in practice by explaining what the logs indicate, and are assessed via manual scoring, reflecting
that human utility and correctness are hard to capture with automatic metrics alone. This line suggests that in
real deployments, summarization is rarely an isolated task. It often co-occurs with Q&A, diagnosis hints, and
“what should I do next” guidance.
Tooling for scalable log processing and its relationship to summarization.While not a summarization
method per se, LogLead [107] illustrates an important enabling trend: scalable pipelines that load, enhance, and
process logs efficiently can serve as thefront-endto LLM summarization by curating what the model sees (e.g.,
enhancing logs, selecting windows, and organizing content). In other words, summarization quality is frequently
bounded by upstream log preparation and selection instead of purely by the decoder’s generation capability.

Across log summarization studies, the key contribution of LLMs is turning noisy, heterogeneous log streams
into coherent narratives and structured incident briefs. The most effective systems do not summarize “raw logs”
directly. They first impose structure through grouping, salience selection, and evidence extraction, and then
generate a constrained summary. This shifts the main challenge from generation tofaithful context curation
and evaluationunder operator-centric criteria.
7 Cross-Cutting Insights and Future Directions
The preceding sections reviewed LLM-based work across the log-analysis pipeline, from logging statement
generation to parsing and downstream operational tasks. Our findings suggest that LLM4Log should not be
understood as a collection of isolated task-specific upgrades. Instead, the same challenges appear across tasks:
semantic flexibility versus controllability, richer evidence integration versus higher cost and latency, and more
operator-friendly outputs versus a greater need for grounding and verification. This section summarizes these
recurring patterns and highlights the most important open directions for reliable real-world adoption.
7.1 Cross-cutting Insights and Trade-offs
Table 9 summarizes the comparison by linking recurring challenges to the main method families and their
practical use. In practice, this means no single paradigm dominates across the whole workflow. Different tasks
and constraints favor different combinations of supervision, retrieval, control, and system design.
The first cross-cutting observation is thatlog-centricLLM systems are distinct from broader LLM4AIOps
settings because logs are both semantically rich and operationally noisy. Unlike metrics or traces, logs often
contain the chronological symptom evidence that operators read directly during debugging and incident triage,
but they also mix free-form descriptions with identifiers, stack frames, configuration keys, and other code-like
tokens. This makes log analysis not only a pattern-recognition problem, but also an evidence-integration and
decision-support problem where the quality of the final operator-facing output matters as much as the underlying
prediction [20, 42, 68].
The second recurring insight is that LLMs are most beneficial when the main challenge is semantic variation
under drift, not stable repeated syntax. In logging-related tasks, this appears when developers need help generating
or revising informative logging statements across evolving codebases and conventions [36, 87, 139, 219]. In parsing,
it appears when template boundaries are ambiguous, delimiters are unstable, or previously unseen messages
emerge under version and deployment drift [6, 64, 103, 188]. In downstream tasks, it appears when semantically
related failures surface through heterogeneous wording across components, or when weak signals must be
integrated across long sequences instead of being recognized from a single fixed pattern [20, 42, 68, 100]. Across
these settings, the main value of LLMs is not that they eliminate preprocessing, but that they tolerate variation
better than approaches tightly coupled to historically observed surface forms [68, 103, 188].
The third pattern is that successful LLM4Log systems rarely rely on unconstrained, end-to-end generation
alone. Across tasks, the most practical designs are selective and layered: they first reduce the search space
through preprocessing, retrieval, filtering, grouping, or lightweight scoring, and only then use a stronger LLM for
semantic interpretation, explanation, or reporting [42, 98, 100, 103]. This pattern is visible in parsing researches
that combine grouping and cache reuse with selective LLM calls, in anomaly detection pipelines that let smaller
encoders or classical models narrow candidate windows before explanation, and in RCA or summarization
systems that retrieve historical incidents, runbooks, or correlated artifacts before generating hypotheses or
reports [20, 42, 98, 100, 103]. The broader lesson is that LLMs are most useful as a high-value reasoning and
explanation component inside a larger pipeline. They are not a drop-in replacement for every stage [20, 42, 68].
These observations also clarify the main trade-offs across current LLM4Log paradigms. Fine-tuning is attractive
when task boundaries are stable and enough supervision exists, but it is harder to refresh under rapid drift [43,

120]. Prompting and ICL support quick adaptation, yet they shift the burden toward prompt engineering and
context management [11, 91, 113]. Retrieval-augmented approaches often provide a better balance for log-centric
workflows because system-specific knowledge can be refreshed without retraining, but this depends on having a
trustworthy retrieval layer [20, 42, 79, 98]. Agentic workflows extend this flexibility further, although the added
coverage comes with higher latency, system complexity, and more opportunities for cascading errors [100, 111,
194]. Across the corpus, the most deployment-friendly compromise is often a hybrid design in which smaller
models or structured filters handle routine narrowing, while a stronger LLM is invoked selectively for ambiguous
cases, explanation, or cross-source analysis [68, 98, 100]. In comparative terms, fine-tuning offers the strongest
task-specific stability when labels and task definitions are reliable, but it is the least convenient to refresh under
rapid drift. Prompting and ICL are easier to adapt quickly, but they are more sensitive to prompt construction
and context quality. Retrieval-augmented methods improve freshness and grounding by injecting system-specific
evidence at inference time, but they depend on robust indexing and retrieval quality. Agentic or hybrid designs
are the most capable of integrating multi-step evidence across tools and artifacts, but they also carry the highest
latency, coordination overhead, and error-propagation risk.
The final cross-task insight concerns operator alignment. Several downstream tasks, especially RCA and
log summarization, require outputs that humans can inspect, challenge, and act on. This creates a stronger
requirement than predictive accuracy alone. A detector that produces a strong F1 score but cannot explain
which evidence matters may still have limited operational value, whereas an RCA assistant or summarizer that
produces plausible but weakly augmented narratives can actively mislead users. Accordingly, many of the most
promising LLM4Log directions couple generation with structured extraction, retrieved evidence, tool support, or
schema-constrained outputs so that the resulting artifacts remain inspectable and verifiable instead of purely
free-form [20, 68, 98, 100].
7.2 Open Challenges and Future Directions
Despite rapid progress, the current LLM4Log literature still exhibits substantial limitations that make direct
cross-paper comparison and real-world translation difficult. A central issue is comparability. Many papers report
the same headline metrics, but the underlying setups often differ in ways that materially affect results: datasets
differ, sessionization or windowing strategies vary, some pipelines depend on parsing while others operate on
raw or lightly normalized text, anomaly ratios are inconsistent, and prompt or model settings are frequently
under-reported [6, 20, 68]. These differences make it difficult to compare performance numbers across studies.
For example, two papers may both report F1, AUC, ROUGE, or Acc@k, but those scores may be based on different
label definitions, windowing or grouping strategies, anomaly ratios, parsing choices, prompt templates, model
versions, decoding settings, or evaluation targets. These differences also make performance claims harder to
interpret. A label may define an anomaly, root cause, or correct answer differently across datasets. Windowing
and grouping can change what evidence is available to the model and can also change the class balance. In highly
imbalanced anomaly-detection datasets, a single aggregate score may hide important failure cases. Similarly,
results based only on public benchmarks may overstate how ready a method is for industrial use. For this reason,
simple pooled rankings or broad claims about the universally best LLM4Log method would be misleading. What
the literature currently supports more reliably is a pattern-level summary of recurring design choices, strengths,
evaluation gaps, and failure modes, not universal leaderboard conclusions [20, 68].
The second challenge is evaluation realism. A large fraction of the corpus still depends on a relatively small set
of public benchmarks, especially HDFS, BGL, and a few adjacent datasets [ 20, 47, 68]. These benchmarks are
useful for controlled comparison, but they only partially reflect the operational realities that motivate LLM-based
log analysis in practice: long causal chains, mixed-source streams, privacy constraints, rapidly evolving software
versions, and the need to correlate logs with tickets, runbooks, metrics, and code [42, 102, 192]. From the released

Table 9. Trade-offs among major LLM adaptation paradigms in LLM4Log.
Paradigm Strength Limitation Cost / drift /
grounding
Best fit
Fine-tuning Stable task-specific
behavior
Needs labels and is
harder to refresh
Medium inference
cost, high refresh
cost / Low–medium
/ Medium
Stable tasks with labeled
data
Prompting /
ICL
Fast adaptation without
retraining
Sensitive to prompts,
examples, and context
selection
Medium–high /
Medium / Low–
medium
Low-label and fast-changing settings
Retrieval-augmented
methods
Fresh system-specific
evidence
Depends on retrieval
quality and index fresh-ness
Medium / High with
a maintained index
/ High if evidence is
exposed
RCA, summarization,
and incident support
Agentic work-flows
Multi-step evidence
gathering and tool use
More complex, with
higher latency and
error-propagation risk
High / Medium–
high / Medium–high
if steps are logged
Complex multi-source
investigation workflows
Hybrid / selec-tive escalation
Balances efficiency and
capability
Requires routing,
caching, and valida-tion design
Low–medium in
routine cases / High
with updated routing / Medium–high
Production pipelines
with cost or latency
constraints
corpus metadata, we further observe that only 25 of the 162 collected papers records explicitly mention industrial
or proprietary context, only 17 report any human or user study signal, only 23 report deployment-style metrics,
and only 5 provide clear deployment-oriented evidence. This makes direct cross-paper comparison difficult
even before considering task heterogeneity: the literature is still dominated by benchmark-oriented academic
prototypes, while industrial-context and deployment-oriented evaluations remain a minority. Evidence about
industrial deployment maturity remains uneven across tasks: RCA currently contains the clearest concentration
of industrial and deployment-style evaluations, while most parsing, anomaly-detection, and summarization
studies remain primarily benchmark-driven, with only a few logging systems reporting concrete organizational
deployment evidence.
The third challenge concerns grounding, privacy, and deployment practicality. Operator-facing outputs in
RCA and summarization can appear coherent even when they are only weakly supported by the logs or retrieved
evidence, making grounding and evidence attribution essential [ 20, 68, 98, 100]. At the same time, logs may
contain sensitive identifiers, internal topology, or security-relevant content, which complicates direct use of
remote API-based LLMs and pushes many practical designs toward self-hosted, retrieval-bounded, or hybrid
architectures [31, 34, 38, 70]. These constraints are not secondary deployment details. They directly shape what
kinds of LLM4Log systems are feasible in practice [31, 34, 111].
Looking ahead, several research directions appear particularly important. First, benchmark design should better
reflect drift, long-tail behavior, and cross-system variation instead of relying mainly on static splits [20, 103, 188].
Second, privacy-preserving and self-hosted LLM4Log deserves more attention, including parameter-efficient
adaptation, on-prem retrieval, and redaction-aware pipelines [23, 31, 34]. Third, RCA and summarization should
move toward more augmented and verifiable outputs, with explicit evidence attribution and stronger evaluation of

faithfulness instead of plausibility alone [20, 68, 98, 100]. Fourth, long-context compression, memory, and adaptive
evidence selection remain central challenges because incident-relevant signals are often sparse and distributed
across long noisy histories [42, 111, 126]. Fifth, the field needs broader industrial-scale evaluation beyond the
standard public benchmarks, including richer multimodal settings and operator-centered studies [20, 102, 192].
Finally, human-in-the-loop support is likely to be more practical than full autonomy in many settings: future
systems should help engineers inspect evidence faster, compare likely causes, summarize timelines, and decide
where to look next while remaining transparent about uncertainty and evidence provenance [98, 102, 192].
8 Conclusion
This survey presented a systematic review ofLLM-based log analysisacross the log-analysis pipeline, covering
logging statement generation and maintenance, log parsing, and downstream tasks such as anomaly detection,
failure prediction, root cause analysis, and log summarization. Across these areas, the literature shows that LLMs
offer clear advantages in semantic generalization, evidence integration, and operator-facing assistance, while
also introducing important challenges in evaluation, grounding, privacy, cost, and deployment practicality. As
discussed in Section 7, progress in LLM4Log will depend not only on stronger models, but also on more rigorous
cross-paper evaluation, better grounding and verification for operator-facing outputs, and system designs that
remain reliable under real-world operational constraints.
References
[1] Siraaj Akhtar, Saad Khan, and Simon Parkinson. Llm-based event log analysis techniques: A survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00677,
2025.
[2] Crispin Almodovar, Fariza Sabrina, Sarvnaz Karimi, and Salahuddin Azad. Logfit: Log anomaly detection using fine-tuned language
models.IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 21(2):1715–1723, 2024.
[3] Apache Software Foundation. Apache log4j 2. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/.
[4] Merve Astekin, Max Hort, and Leon Moonen. A comparative study on large language models for log parsing. InProceedings of the 18th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM 2024), pages 36–47. ACM, 2024. doi:
10.1145/3674805.3686684. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3674805.3686684.
[5] Prasasthy Balasubramanian, Dumindu Kankanamge, Ekaterina Gilman, and Mourad Oussalah. AnomalyExplainerBot: Explainable AI
for LLM-based anomaly detection using BERTViz & Captum, 2025.
[6] Viktor Beck, Max Landauer, Markus Wurzenberger, Florian Skopik, and Andreas Rauber. System log parsing with large language
models: A review.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04877, 2025.
[7] Sidahmed Benabderrahmane, Petko Valtchev, James Cheney, and Talal Rahwan. APT-LLM: Embedding-based anomaly detection of
cyber advanced persistent threats using large language models. InProceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Digital Forensics
and Security (ISDFS 2025), pages 1–6, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ISDFS65363.2025.11011912.
[8] Jasmin Bogatinovski and Odej Kao. Auto-logging: Ai-centred logging instrumentation. In2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference
on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER), pages 95–100, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/ICSE-NIER58687.2023.00023.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-NIER58687.2023.00023.
[9] Bogdan Bogdan, Arina Cazacu, and Laura Vasilie. Good enough to learn: LLM-based anomaly detection in ECU logs without reliable
labels, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01077. Accepted to IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) 2025.
[10] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette
Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie
Chen, Kathleen Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Jeff Dean, et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258.
[11] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
1877–1901, 2020.
[12] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn
Song, Úlfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin Raffel. Extracting training data from large language models. In30th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pages 2633–2650, 2021. URL https://www .usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/
carlini-extracting.

[13] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda,
Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin,
Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe
Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen
Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher
Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira
Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
[14] Song Chen and Hai Liao. Bert-log: Anomaly detection for system logs based on pre-trained language model.Applied Artificial Intelligence,
36(1):2145642, 2022. doi: 10 .1080/08839514.2022.2145642. URL https://www .tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/08839514.2022.2145642.
[15] Xiaolei Chen, Jie Shi, Jia Chen, Peng Wang, and Wei Wang. Epas: Efficient online log parsing via asynchronous scheduling of llm
queries. InProceedings of the 41st IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2025), pages 4025–4037. IEEE, 2025. doi:
10.1109/ICDE.2025.00318. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/11113127.
[16] Yinfang Chen, Huaibing Xie, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, Xin Gao, Liu Shi, Yunjie Cao, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Ming Wen, et al. Automatic
root cause analysis via large language models for cloud incidents. InProceedings of the Nineteenth European Conference on Computer
Systems, pages 674–688, 2024.
[17] Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and Christopher D Manning. Electra: Pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather
than generators.arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
[18] Clara Corbelle, Victor Carneiro, and Fidel Cacheda. Semantic hierarchical classification applied to anomaly detection using system
logs with a bert model.Applied Sciences, 14(13), 2024. ISSN 2076-3417. doi: 10 .3390/app14135388. URL https://www .mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/13/5388.
[19] Tianyu Cui, Ruowei Fu, Changchang Liu, Yuhe Ji, Wenwei Gu, Shenglin Zhang, Yongqian Sun, and Dan Pei. Aetherlog: Log-based root
cause analysis by integrating large language models with knowledge graphs. In2025 IEEE 36th International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pages 49–60. IEEE, 2025.
[20] Tianyu Cui, Shiyu Ma, Ziang Chen, Tong Xiao, Chenyu Zhao, Shimin Tao, Yilun Liu, Shenglin Zhang, Duoming Lin, Changchang Liu,
Yuzhe Cai, Weibin Meng, Yongqian Sun, and Dan Pei. Logeval: A comprehensive benchmark suite for llms in log analysis.Empirical
Softw. Engg., 30(6), October 2025. ISSN 1382-3256. doi: 10 .1007/s10664-025-10701-6. URL https://doi .org/10.1007/s10664-025-10701-6.
[21] Hetong Dai, Heng Li, Che-Shao Chen, Weiyi Shang, and Tse-Hsun Chen. Logram: Efficient log parsing using n n-gram dictionaries.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 48(3):879–892, 2020.
[22] Delgan and contributors. loguru: Python logging made simple. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://github .com/Delgan/loguru.
[23] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14314.
[24] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. InProceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human
language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers), pages 4171–4186, 2019.
[25] Shengcheng Duan, Yihua Xu, Sheng Zhang, Shen Wang, and Yue Duan. Pdlogger: Automated logging framework for practical software
development, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19951.
[26] Yiqi Duan, Jianliang Xu, Changyu Fan, and Zixin Liu. Unsupervised log parsing based on large language models and entropy. In2025
11th International Symposium on System Security, Safety, and Reliability (ISSSR), pages 1–10. IEEE, 2025.
[27] Chris Egersdoerfer, Di Zhang, and Dong Dai. Early exploration of using ChatGPT for log-based anomaly detection on parallel file systems
logs. InProceedings of the 32nd International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (HPDC ’23), pages
315–316. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3588195.3595943. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3588195.3595943.
[28] Maryam Ekhlasi, Anurag Prakash, Maxime Lamothe, and Michel Dagenais. Insightai: Root cause analysis in large log files with private
data using large language model. In2025 IEEE/ACM 4th International Conference on AI Engineering – Software Engineering for AI (CAIN),
pages 31–41, 2025. doi: 10.1109/CAIN66642.2025.00012.
[29] Mahmoudreza Entezami, Shahabeddin Rahimi Harsini, David Houshangi, and Zahra Entezami. A novel framework for detecting
anomalies in network security using LLM and deep learning.Journal of Electrical Systems, 21(1s):294–302, 2025. doi: 10 .52783/jes.8791.
[30] Kawin Ethayarajh. How contextual are contextualized word representations? comparing the geometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2
embeddings. InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 55–65, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/D19-1006.
[31] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of the council (general
data protection regulation). Official Journal of the European Union, L119, 2016. URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.

[32] Asma Fariha, Vida Gharavian, Masoud Makrehchi, Shahryar Rahnamayan, Sanaa Alwidian, and Akramul Azim. Log anomaly detection
by leveraging llm-based parsing and embedding with attention mechanism. In2024 IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering (CCECE), pages 859–863. IEEE, 2024.
[33] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and
Ming Zhou. Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages. InFindings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1536–1547. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10 .18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.139.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.139/.
[34] Joint Task Force. Security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations (nist special publication 800-53 revision 5),
2020. URL https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-53/rev-5/final.
[35] Amy Foster and Selva Kumar.COMBINING LLMS AND SHELL LOGS TO PREDICT BACKUP FAILURES. 07 2025.
[36] Qiang Fu, Jieming Zhu, Wenlu Hu, Jian-Guang Lou, Rui Ding, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, and Tao Xie. Where do developers log? an
empirical study on logging practices in industry. InCompanion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering,
pages 24–33. ACM, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2591062.2591175.
[37] Ying Fu, Meng Yan, Pinjia He, Chao Liu, Xiaohong Zhang, and Dan Yang. End-to-end log statement generation at block-level.Journal
of Systems and Software, 216:112146, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2024.112146.
[38] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christopher Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you  ́ve signed up for:
Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12173.
[39] Wei Guan, Jian Cao, Shiyou Qian, and Jianqi Gao. LogLLM: Log-based anomaly detection using large language models.arXiv preprint,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.08561.
[40] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu. Logbert: Log anomaly detection via bert. In2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
pages 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
[41] Hongcheng Guo, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Jiaqi Bai, Boyang Wang, Zhoujun Li, Tieqiao Zheng, Bo Zhang, Junran Peng, and Qi Tian.
Logformer: A pre-train and tuning pipeline for log anomaly detection. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), pages 135–143, 2024.
[42] Hongcheng Guo, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Liqun Yang, Linzheng Chai, Jiaqi Bai, Junran Peng, Xiaorong Hu, Chao Chen, Dongfeng Zhang,
Xu Shi, Tieqiao Zheng, Liangfan Zheng, Bo Zhang, Ke Xu, and Zhoujun Li. Owl: A large language model for it operations. InProceedings of
the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2024), 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SZOQ9RKYJu.
[43] Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasović, Swabha Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Noah A. Smith. Don’t stop
pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks. InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 8342–8360. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10 .18653/v1/2020.acl-main.740. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.740/.
[44] Fatemeh Hadadi, Qinghua Xu, Domenico Bianculli, and Lionel Briand. Llm meets ml: Data-efficient anomaly detection on unstable
logs.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025. doi: 10 .1145/3771283. URL https://doi .org/10.1145/3771283.
arXiv:2406.07467.
[45] Minghua He, Tong Jia, Chiming Duan, Huaqian Cai, Ying Li, and Gang Huang. Llmelog: An approach for anomaly detection based on
llm-enriched log events. In2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pages 132–143. IEEE,
2024.
[46] Pinjia He, Jieming Zhu, Zibin Zheng, and Michael R. Lyu. Drain: An online log parsing approach with fixed depth tree. In2017 IEEE
International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), pages 33–40, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICWS.2017.13.
[47] Shilin He, Pinjia He, Zhuangbin Chen, Tianyi Yang, Yuxin Su, and Michael R Lyu. A survey on automated log analysis for reliability
engineering.ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–37, 2021.
[48] Shiming He, Ying Lei, Ying Zhang, Kun Xie, and Pradip Kumar Sharma. Parameter-efficient log anomaly detection based on pre-training
model and lora. In2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pages 207–217. IEEE, 2023.
[49] Yi Wen Heng, Zeyang Ma, Zhenhao Li, Dong Jae Kim, and Tse-Hsun Chen. Benchmarking open-source large language models
for log level suggestion. In2025 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST), pages 314–325, 2025. doi:
10.1109/ICST62969.2025.10988921.
[50] Jordis Emilia Herrmann, Aswath Mandakath Gopinath, Mikael Norrlof, and Mark Niklas Mueller. Diagnosing robotics systems issues
with large language models–a case study. InICLR 2025 Workshop on Foundation Models in the Wild.
[51] András Horváth, András Oláh, Attila Pintér, Bálint Siklósi, Gergely Lukács, István Z. Reguly, Kálmán Tornai, Tamás Zsedrovits, and
Zoltán Máthé. Anomaly detection algorithms for real-time log data analysis at scale.IEEE Access, 13:136288–136311, 2025. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3565575.
[52] Changze Hu, Yu Fang, Jinhua Wu, Haoyang Li, and Geng Wang. Research on log anomaly detection based on sentence-BERT.Electronics,
12(17):3580, 2023. doi: 10.3390/electronics12173580. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/12/17/3580.
[53] Junjie Huang, Zhihan Jiang, Jinyang Liu, Yintong Huo, Jiazhen Gu, Zhuangbin Chen, Cong Feng, Hui Dong, Zengyin Yang, and
Michael R Lyu. Demystifying and extracting fault-indicating information from logs for failure diagnosis. In2024 IEEE 35th International

Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pages 511–522. IEEE, 2024.
[54] Junjie Huang, Zhihan Jiang, Zhuangbin Chen, and Michael R. Lyu. No more labelled examples? an unsupervised log parser with
llms. InProceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering (FSE 2025), number FSE. ACM, 2025. doi: 10 .1145/3729377. URL https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3729377.
[55] Shaohan Huang, Yi Liu, Carol J. Fung, Rong He, Yining Zhao, Hailong Yang, and Zhongzhi Luan. Hitanomaly: Hierarchical transformers
for anomaly detection in system log.IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 17(2):2064–2076, 2020. doi: 10 .1109/
TNSM.2020.3034647.
[56] Shaohan Huang, Yi Liu, Carol J. Fung, He Wang, Hailong Yang, and Zhongzhi Luan. Improving log-based anomaly detection by
pre-training hierarchical transformers.IEEE Transactions on Computers, 72(9):2656–2667, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TC.2023.3257518.
[57] Xin Huang, Ting Zhang, and Wen Zhao. LogRules: Enhancing log analysis capability of large language models through rules. In
Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang, editors,Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 452–
470, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10 .18653/v1/
2025.findings-naacl.28. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.28/.
[58] Xuanbo Huang, Kaiping Xue, Lutong Chen, Jiangping Han, Jian Li, and David S. L. Wei. Forensix: Automated network forensics
and diagnostics for beyond-5g and 6g networks using large language models.IEEE Network, 39(5):74–80, 2025. doi: 10 .1109/
MNET.2025.3579925.
[59] Yintong Huo, Cheryl Lee, Yuxin Su, Shiwen Shan, Jinyang Liu, and Michael R. Lyu. Evlog: Evolving log analyzer for anomalous logs
identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01509, 2023.
[60] Jaeyoon Jeong, Insung Baek, Byungwoo Bang, Junyeon Lee, Uiseok Song, and Seoung Bum Kim. Fall: Prior failure detection in
large scale system based on language model.IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 22(1):279–291, 2025. doi:
10.1109/TDSC.2024.3396166.
[61] Xin Ji, Le Zhang, Wenya Zhang, Fang Peng, Yifan Mao, Xingchuang Liao, and Kui Zhang. Lemad: LLM-empowered multi-agent
system for anomaly detection in power grid services.Electronics, 14(15):3008, 2025. doi: 10 .3390/electronics14153008. URL https:
//doi.org/10.3390/electronics14153008.
[62] Yuhe Ji, Yilun Liu, Feiyu Yao, Minggui He, Shimin Tao, Xiaofeng Zhao, Chang Su, Xinhua Yang, Weibin Meng, Yuming Xie, Boxing
Chen, Shenglin Zhang, and Yongqian Sun. Adapting large language models to log analysis with interpretable domain knowledge.
InProceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’25, page 1135–1144,
New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400720406. doi: 10 .1145/3746252.3761189. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3746252.3761189.
[63] Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tianle Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Yejin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of
hallucination in natural language generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04710.
[64] Zhihan Jiang, Jinyang Liu, Zhuangbin Chen, Yichen Li, Junjie Huang, Yintong Huo, Pinjia He, Jiazhen Gu, and Michael R. Lyu. Lilac:
Log parsing using llms with adaptive parsing cache.Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 1(FSE), 2024. doi: 10 .1145/3643733.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3643733.
[65] Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
Drain, Nelson Chen, Yuntao Bai, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Dario Amodei, Ethan Chen, and Catherine Olsson. Language models
(mostly) know what they know, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05221.
[66] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and
Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/2001.08361.
[67] Crystal Karlsen, Denis Copstein, Yue Luo, Benjamin Schwartzentruber, Tim Niblett, and Olivier Rouyer. Exploring semantic vs.
syntactic features for unsupervised learning on application log files. In2023 International Conference on Cyber Security and Networks
(CSNet), 2023. doi: 10.1109/CSNet59123.2023.10339765.
[68] Egil Karlsen, Xiao Luo, Nur Zincir-Heywood, and Malcolm Heywood. Benchmarking large language models for log analysis, security,
and interpretation.Journal of Network and Systems Management, 32:59, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s10922-024-09831-x.
[69] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense
passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 6769–6781. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10 .18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.550. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.550/.
[70] Karen Kent and Murugiah Souppaya. Nist special publication 800-92: Guide to computer security log management, 2006. URL
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-92/final.
[71] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang. Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing. In2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE/ACM, 2021.
[72] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang. Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot learning. InProceedings of the 45th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE 2023), pages 2438–2449. IEEE, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/ICSE48619.2023.00204. URL https://conf .researchr.org/
details/icse-2023/icse-2023-technical-track/165/Log-Parsing-with-Prompt-based-Few-shot-Learning.

[73] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang. Log parsing: How far can chatgpt go? InProceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’23, page 1699–1704. IEEE Press, 2024. ISBN 9798350329964. doi: 10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00206.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00206.
[74] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang. Prelog: A pre-trained model for log analytics.Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data, 2(3):
1–28, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3654966. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3654966. Presented at SIGMOD 2024.
[75] Van-Hoang Le, Yi Xiao, and Hongyu Zhang. Unleashing the true potential of semantic-based log parsing with pre-trained
language models. InProceedings of the 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2025). IEEE/ACM, 2025.
URL https://conf .researchr.org/details/icse-2025/icse-2025-research-track/80/Unleashing-the-True-Potential-of-Semantic-based-LogParsing-with-Pre-trained-Language. To appear.
[76] Juyoung Lee, Yeonsu Jeong, Taehyun Han, and Taejin Lee. Logresp-agent: A recursive ai framework for context-aware log anomaly
detection and ttp analysis.Applied Sciences, 15(13), 2025. ISSN 2076-3417. doi: 10 .3390/app15137237. URL https://www .mdpi.com/2076-3417/15/13/7237.
[77] Yukyung Lee, Jina Kim, and Pilsung Kang. Lanobert: System log anomaly detection based on bert masked language model, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09564.
[78] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In
Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pages 7871–7880, 2020.
[79] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K"uttler, Mike Lewis,
Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt"aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401.
[80] Xiaoyun Li, Pengfei Chen, Linxiao Jing, Zilong He, and Guangba Yu. Swisslog: Robust and unified deep learning based log anomaly
detection for diverse faults. In2020 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pages 92–103. IEEE,
2020.
[81] Xinyu Li, Yingtong Huo, Chenxi Mao, Shiwen Shan, Yuxin Su, Dan Li, and Zibin Zheng. AnomalyGen: An automated semantic log
sequence generation framework with LLM for anomaly detection, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12250.
[82] Yichen Li, Yintong Huo, Zhihan Jiang, Renyi Zhong, Pinjia He, Yuxin Su, Lionel C Briand, and Michael R Lyu. Exploring the effectiveness
of llms in automated logging statement generation: An empirical study.IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[83] Yichen Li, Yintong Huo, Renyi Zhong, Zhihan Jiang, Jinyang Liu, Junjie Huang, Jiazhen Gu, Pinjia He, and Michael R. Lyu. Go
static: Contextualized logging statement generation.Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 1(FSE):609–630, 2024. doi:
10.1145/3643754. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3643754.
[84] Yichen Li, Jinyang Liu, Junsong Pu, Zhihan Jiang, Zhuangbin Chen, Xiao He, Tieying Zhang, Jianjun Chen, Yi Li, Rui Shi, and Michael
Lyu. Automated proactive logging quality improvement for large-scale codebases. InProceedings of the 2025 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2025) (Industry Showcase), 2025. URL https://conf .researchr.org/details/ase-2025/ase-2025-industry-showcase/28/Automated-Proactive-Logging-Quality-Improvement-for-Large-Scale-Codebases.
[85] Yichen Li, Yulun Wu, Jinyang Liu, Zhihan Jiang, Zhuangbin Chen, Guangba Yu, and Michael R Lyu. Coca: Generative root cause
analysis for distributed systems with code knowledge.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23051, 2025.
[86] Zhenhao Li, Heng Li, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Weiyi Shang. Deeplv: Suggesting log levels using ordinal based neural networks. In2021
IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 1461–1472. IEEE, 2021.
[87] Zhenhao Li, An Ran Chen, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Weiyi Shang. Are they all good? studying practitioners’ expectations
on the readability of log messages. InProceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE 2023), 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.08836. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08836.
[88] Yifan Liao, Ming Xu, Yun Lin, Xiwen Teoh, Xiaofei Xie, Ruitao Feng, Frank Liaw, Hongyu Zhang, and Jin Song Dong. Detecting and
explaining anomalies caused by web tamper attacks via building consistency-based normality. InProceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, pages 531–543, 2024.
[89] Ying Fu Lim, Jiawen Zhu, and Guansong Pang. Adapting large language models for parameter-efficient log anomaly detection. arXiv
preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08045. arXiv:2503.08045.
[90] Yifei Lin, H. Deng, and X. Li. Fastlogad: Log anomaly detection with mask-guided pseudo anomaly generation and discrimination,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.08750.
[91] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic
survey of prompting methods in natural language processing, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.13586.
[92] Yilun Liu, Shimin Tao, Weibin Meng, Jingyu Wang, Wenbing Ma, Yuhang Chen, Yanqing Zhao, Hao Yang, and Yanfei Jiang. Interpretable
online log analysis using large language models with prompt strategies. InProceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Program Comprehension (ICPC ’24), pages 35–46. Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. doi: 10 .1145/3643916.3644408. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3643916.3644408.

[93] Yilun Liu, Shimin Tao, Weibin Meng, Feiyu Yao, Xingyu Zhao, and Hao Yang. LogPrompt: Prompt engineering towards zero-shot
and interpretable log analysis. InCompanion Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE Companion ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. doi: 10 .1145/3639478.3643108. URL https://doi .org/10.1145/
3639478.3643108.
[94] Yilun Liu, Yuhe Ji, Shimin Tao, Minggui He, Weibin Meng, Shenglin Zhang, Yongqian Sun, Yuming Xie, Boxing Chen, and Hao Yang.
Loglm: From task-based to instruction-based automated log analysis. In2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software
Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), pages 401–412. IEEE, 2025.
[95] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin
Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[96] Yang Lu.LogSage: Log Summarization Assistant with Guided Enhancement, page 1979–1981. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2025. ISBN 9798400706295. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3672608.3707990.
[97] Wengang Lyu, Yilun Wang, Wei Wei, Runkun Xiao, Youwei Li, Gen Li, Laiyuan Yang, and Zibin Zheng. Exploring variable potential for
llm-based log parsing efficiency and reduced costs. InProceedings of the FSE 2025 Companion, 2025. doi: 10 .1145/3696630.3728506. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3696630.3728506.
[98] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Sihang Jiang, Ben Fei, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li, Mingyu Zhao, Bo Xu, and Yanghua Xiao. LUK: Empowering
log understanding with expert knowledge from large language models, 2024.
[99] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Bo Xu, Sihang Jiang, Ben Fei, Jiaqing Liang, Mingjie Zhou, and Yanghua Xiao. Knowlog: Knowledge enhanced
pre-trained language model for log understanding. InProceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering,
ICSE ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400702174. doi: 10.1145/3597503.3623304. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3623304.
[100] Lipeng Ma, Yixuan Li, Weidong Yang, Mingjie Zhou, Xinyi Liu, Ben Fei, Shuhao Li, Xiaoyan Sun, Sihang Jiang, and Yanghua Xiao.
LogReasoner: Empowering LLMs with expert-like coarse-to-fine reasoning for log analysis tasks, 2025.
[101] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Yixuan Li, Ben Fei, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li, Sihang Jiang, Bo Xu, and Yanghua Xiao. Adaptivelog: An
adaptive log analysis framework with the collaboration of large and small language model.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3749840. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3749840. arXiv:2501.11031.
[102] X. Ma, Y. Li, J. Keung, X. Yu, H. Zou, Z. Yang, F. Sarro, and E. T. Barr. Practitioners’ expectations on log anomaly detection.IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 51(9):2455–2471, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2025.3586700.
[103] Zeyang Ma, An Ran Chen, Dong Jae Kim, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Shaowei Wang. Llmparser: An exploratory study on using large
language models for log parsing. InProceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2024),
pages 99:1–99:13, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3597503.3639150. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639150.
[104] Zeyang Ma, Dong Jae Kim, and Tse-Hsun Chen. Librelog: Accurate and efficient unsupervised log parsing using open-source
large language models. InProceedings of the 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2025). IEEE/ACM, 2025.
URL https://conf.researchr.org/details/icse-2025/icse-2025-research-track/75/LibreLog-Accurate-and-Efficient-Unsupervised-LogParsing-Using-Open-Source-Large-Lan. To appear.
[105] Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J. F. Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative
large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08896.
[106] Praveen Kumar Mannam. Optimizing software release management with gpt-enabled log anomaly detection. In2023 26th International
Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2023.
[107] Mika V Mäntylä, Yuqing Wang, and Jesse Nyyssölä. Loglead-fast and integrated log loader, enhancer, and anomaly detector. In2024
IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), pages 395–399. IEEE, 2024.
[108] Antonio Mastropaolo, Luca Pascarella, and Gabriele Bavota. Using deep learning to generate complete log statements. InProceedings
of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), pages 2279–2290, 2022. doi: 10 .1145/3510003.3511561. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3511561.
[109] Antonio Mastropaolo, Valentina Ferrari, Luca Pascarella, and Gabriele Bavota. Log statements generation via deep learning: Widening
the support provided to developers.Journal of Systems and Software, 210:111947, 2024. doi: 10 .1016/j.jss.2023.111947. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2023.111947.
[110] Maryam Mehrabi, Abdelwahab Hamou-Lhadj, and Hossein Moosavi. The effectiveness of compact fine-tuned llms in log parsing. In
2024 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), pages 438–448. IEEE, 2024.
[111] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick,
Damien Sileo, Lewis Tunstall, et al. Augmented language models: a survey, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07842.
[112] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality.Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
[113] Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context
learning work?, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.12837.

[114] Priyanka Mudgal, Bijan Arbab, and Swaathi Sampath Kumar. Crasheventllm: Predicting system crashes with large language models. In
2024 International Conference on Information Technology and Computing (ICITCOM), pages 72–76. IEEE, 2024.
[115] Gunho No, Yukyung Lee, Hyeongwon Kang, and Pilsung Kang. RAPID: Training-free retrieval-based log anomaly detection with
pre-trained language model considering token-level information.Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 133:108613, 2024.
doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108613.
[116] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
[117] Oracle. Java platform, standard editionjava.util.logging. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/.
[118] Harold Ott, Jasmin Bogatinovski, Alexander Acker, Sasho Nedelkoski, and Odej Kao. Robust and transferable anomaly detection in log
data using pre-trained language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.11570.
[119] Youssef Esseddiq Ouatiti, Mohammed Sayagh, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E. Hassan. Omnillp: Enhancing llm-based log level prediction
with context-aware retrieval, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08545.
[120] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina
Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F.
Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.
[121] Jonathan Pan, Swee Liang Wong, and Yidi Yuan. Raglog: Log anomaly detection using retrieval augmented generation, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05261.
[122] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, 2002.
[123] Changhua Pei, Zihan Liu, Jianhui Li, Erhan Zhang, Le Zhang, Haiming Zhang, Wei Chen, Dan Pei, and Gaogang Xie. Self-evolutionary
group-wise log parsing based on large language model. In2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE), pages 49–60. IEEE, 2024.
[124] Changhua Pei, Zexin Wang, Fengrui Liu, Zeyan Li, Yang Liu, Xiao He, Rong Kang, Tieying Zhang, Jianjun Chen, Jianhui Li, et al.
Flow-of-action: Sop enhanced llm-based multi-agent system for root cause analysis. InCompanion Proceedings of the ACM on Web
Conference 2025, pages 422–431, 2025.
[125] Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep
contextualized word representations. InProceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202.
[126] Reiner Pope, Yash Jain, Rohan Peri, Jeff Hankins, Baolin Lin, and Ion Stoica. Efficiently scaling transformer inference with pagedattention,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180.
[127] Przemek Pospieszny, Wojciech Mormul, Karolina Szyndler, and Sanjeev Kumar. ADALog: Adaptive unsupervised anomaly detection in
logs with self-attention masked language model.arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13496.
[128] Python Software Foundation. Python logging — logging facility for python. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://docs.python.org/
3/library/logging.html.
[129] Jiaxing Qi, Shaohan Huang, Zhongzhi Luan, Shu Yang, Carol J. Fung, Hailong Yang, Depei Qian, Jing Shang, Zhiwen Xiao, and Zhihui
Wu. LogGPT: Exploring ChatGPT for log-based anomaly detection. In2023 IEEE International Conference on High Performance
Computing & Communications, Data Science & Systems, Smart City & Dependability in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems & Application
(HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), pages 273–280, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/HPCC-DSS-SMARTCITY-DEPENDSYS60770 .2023.00045. URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCC-DSS-SmartCity-DependSys60770.2023.00045.
[130] Xipeng Qiu, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao, Ning Dai, and Xuanjing Huang. Pre-trained models for natural language processing:
A survey.Science China Technological Sciences, 63(10):1872–1897, 2020. doi: 10 .1007/s11431-020-1647-3. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/
2003.08271.
[131] QOS.ch. Logback. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://logback.qos.ch/.
[132] QOS.ch. Slf4j: Simple logging facade for java. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://www.slf4j.org/.
[133] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization:
Your language model is secretly a reward model, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290.
[134] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu.
Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67,
2020.
[135] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084,
2019.
[136] Youcef Remil, Anes Bendimerad, Romain Mathonat, and Mehdi Kaytoue. Aiops solutions for incident management: Technical guidelines
and a comprehensive literature review.arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01363, 2024.

[137] Hengyi Ren, Kun Lan, Zhi Sun, and Shan Liao. Clogllm: A large language model enabled approach to cybersecurity log anomaly
analysis. In2024 4th International Conference on Electronic Information Engineering and Computer Communication (EIECC), pages
963–970. IEEE, 2024.
[138] Mayra Sofia Ruiz Rodriguez, SayedHassan Khatoonabadi, and Emad Shihab. Automated file-level logging generation for machine
learning applications using llms: A case study using gpt-4o mini, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.04820.
[139] Guoping Rong, Shenghui Gu, Haifeng Shen, He Zhang, and Hongyu Kuang. How do developers’ profiles and experiences influence
their logging practices? an empirical study of industrial practitioners. InProceedings of the 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering, 2023.
[140] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and
Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761.
[141] Hynek Schlawack and contributors. structlog: Structured logging for python. Online documentation, 2024. URL https://
www.structlog.org/.
[142] Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning. Get to the point: Summarization with pointer-generator networks. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), volume 1, pages 1073–1083, 2017. doi:
10.18653/v1/P17-1099.
[143] Pratheek Senevirathne, Samindu Cooray, Jerome Dinal Herath, and Dinuni Fernando. Virtual machine proactive fault tolerance using
log-based anomaly detection.IEEE Access, 2024.
[144] Febrian Setianto, Erion Tsani, Fatima Sadiq, Georgios Domalis, Dimitris Tsakalidis, and Panos Kostakos. Gpt-2c: A parser for
honeypot logs using large pre-trained language models. InProceedings of the 2021 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances
in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM 2021), pages 649–653. ACM, 2021. doi: 10 .1145/3487351.3492723. URL https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3487351.3492723.
[145] Shiwen Shan, Yintong Huo, Yuxin Su, Yichen Li, Dan Li, and Zibin Zheng. Face it yourselves: An llm-based two-stage strategy to
localize configuration errors via logs. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
pages 13–25, 2024.
[146] Shiwen Shan, Yintong Huo, Yuxin Su, Zhining Wang, Dan Li, and Zibin Zheng. Conflogger: Enhance systems’ configuration
diagnosability through configuration logging. InProceedings of the 48th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’26). ACM, 2026. doi: 10.1145/3744916.3764570. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.20977.
[147] Yangyi Shao, Wenbin Zhang, Peishun Liu, Ren Huyue, Ruichun Tang, Qilin Yin, and Qi Li. Log anomaly detection method based on
bert model optimization. In2022 7th International conference on cloud computing and big data analytics (ICCCBDA), pages 161–166.
IEEE, 2022.
[148] Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforce-ment learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366.
[149] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training
multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053.
[150] Honglin Shu, Dong Wang, Antonio Mastropaolo, Gabriele Bavota, and Yasutaka Kamei. An empirical study on language models for
generating log statements in test code.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3759915.
[151] Chengyu Song, Linru Ma, Jianming Zheng, Jinzhi Liao, Hongyu Kuang, and Lin Yang. Audit-LLM: Multi-agent collaboration for
log-based insider threat detection.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08902.
[152] Chengyu Song, Lin Yang, Jianming Zheng, and Fei Cai. Parse-llm: A prior-free llm parser for unknown system logs. InProceedings of the
34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM 2025). ACM, 2025. doi: 10 .1145/3746252.3761363.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3746252.3761363.
[153] Shuang Song, Yifei Zhang, and Neng Gao. Confront insider threat: Precise anomaly detection in behavior logs based on LLM fine-tuning.
In Owen Rambow, Leo Wanner, Marianna Apidianaki, Hend Al-Khalifa, Barbara Di Eugenio, and Steven Schockaert, editors,Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 8589–8601, Abu Dhabi, UAE, January 2025. Association for
Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.coling-main.574/.
[154] Abhay Srivatsa and Venkatasai Gudisa. Logsense: Scalable real-time log anomaly detection architecture.
[155] Yicheng Sui, Xiaotian Wang, Tianyu Cui, Tong Xiao, Chenghao He, Shenglin Zhang, Yuzhi Zhang, Xiao Yang, Yongqian Sun, and Dan
Pei. Bridging the gap: LLM-powered transfer learning for log anomaly detection in new software systems. In41st IEEE International
Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2025, Hong Kong, May 19-23, 2025, pages 4414–4427. IEEE, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICDE65448.2025.00331.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE65448.2025.00331.
[156] Danyu Sun, Jinghuai Zhang, Jiacen Xu, Yu Zheng, Yuan Tian, and Zhou Li. From alerts to intelligence: A novel LLM-aided framework
for host-based intrusion detection, 2025.
[157] Yicheng Sun, Jacky Wai Keung, Zhen Yang, Shuo Liu, and Yihan Liao. SemiSMAC: A semi-supervised framework for log anomaly detec-tion with automated hyperparameter tuning.Information and Software Technology, 187:107869, 2025. doi: 10 .1016/j.infsof .2025.107869.

[158] Yicheng Sun, Jacky Wai Keung, Zhen Yang, Shuo Liu, and Hi Kuen Yu. Semirald: A semi-supervised hybrid language model for
robust anomalous log detection.Information and Software Technology, 183:107743, July 2025. doi: 10 .1016/j.infsof .2025.107743. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2025.107743.
[159] Yicheng Sun, Jacky Keung, Zhen Yang, Shuo Liu, and Hi Kuen Yu. Improving anomaly detection in software logs through hybrid
language modeling and reduced reliance on parser.Automated Software Engineering, 33(1):12, 2026.
[160] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 27, 2014.
[161] Sayed Taheri, Achintha Ihalage, Prateek Mishra, Sean Coaker, Faris Muhammad, and Hamed Al-Raweshidy. Domain tailored large
language models for log mask prediction in cellular network diagnostics.IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 22(3):
2370–2381, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3541384.
[162] Boyin Tan, Junjielong Xu, Zhouruixing Zhu, and Pinjia He. Al-bench: A benchmark for automatic logging, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2502.03160.
[163] Pan Tang, Shixiang Tang, Huanqi Pu, Zhiqing Miao, and Zhixing Wang. Microrca-agent: Microservice root cause analysis method
based on large language model agents.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.15635, 2025.
[164] Shimin Tao, Weibin Meng, Yimeng Chen, Yichen Zhu, Ying Liu, Chunning Du, Tao Han, Yongpeng Zhao, Xiangguang Wang, and Hao
Yang. Logstamp: Automatic online log parsing based on sequence labelling.ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 49(4):
93–98, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3543146.3543168. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3543146.3543168.
[165] Shimin Tao, Yilun Liu, Weibin Meng, Zuomin Ren, Hao Yang, Xun Chen, Liang Zhang, Yuming Xie, Chang Su, Xiaosong Oiao, Weinan
Tian, Yichen Zhu, Tao Han, Ying Qin, and Yun Li. Biglog: Unsupervised large-scale pre-training for a unified log representation. In
2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), pages 1–11, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/IWQoS57198.2023.10188759.
[166] Subin Thali, R. Chethan, G. Supreeth, M. Sangamesh, and S. Swami. LLM-based detection of cyber anomalies in industrial control
systems.Zhuzao/Foundry, 28(6):237–241, 2025. doi: 10.29014/FJ-2025-1001-4977.2073.
[167] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman
Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[168] Mohamed Trabelsi, Zenghui Yuan, Jiuyong Han, and Fatima Zohra Ros. LogGPT: Log anomaly detection via GPT.arXiv preprint, 2023.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14482.
[169] Risto Vaarandi and Hayretdin Bahsi. Using large language models for template detection from security event logs.International Journal
of Information Security, 24, 2025. doi: 10.1007/s10207-025-01018-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10207-025-01018-y.
[170] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
Attention is all you need.Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[171] Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and composing robust features with
denoising autoencoders. InProceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1096–1103, 2008. doi:
10.1145/1390156.1390294.
[172] Jiabo Wang, Guojun Chu, Jingyu Wang, Haifeng Sun, Qi Qi, Yuanyi Wang, Ji Qi, and Jianxin Liao. Logexpert: Log-based recommended
resolutions generation using large language model. InProceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Software
Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results, ICSE-NIER’24, page 42–46, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9798400705007. doi: 10.1145/3639476.3639773. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3639476.3639773.
[173] Kehan Wang, Siqin Zhang, Haijing Nan, Xueyu Hou, Jiaqi Zou, and Zicong Miao.Empirical Analysis of LLMDPP: Advancing Log
Parsing in the LLM Era, page 753–758. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2025. ISBN 9798400714535. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3711875.3736683.
[174] Tingting Wang and Guilin Qi. A comprehensive survey on root cause analysis in (micro) services: Methodologies, challenges, and
trends.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00803, 2024.
[175] Xin Wang, Zhenhao Li, and Zishuo Ding. Defects4log: Benchmarking llms for logging code defect detection and reasoning, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11305.
[176] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
improves chain of thought reasoning in language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171.
[177] Yilun Wang, Pengfei Chen, Haiyu Huang, Zilong He, Gou Tan, Chuanfu Zhang, Jingkai He, and Zibin Zheng. Inferlog: Accelerating
llm inference for online log parsing via icl-oriented prefix caching. InProceedings of the 48th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE 2026), 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08523. Accepted.
[178] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models
for code understanding and generation. InProceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 8696–8708. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10 .18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.685. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.685/.
[179] Zefan Wang, Zichuan Liu, Yingying Zhang, Aoxiao Zhong, Jihong Wang, Fengbin Yin, Lunting Fan, Lingfei Wu, and Qingsong Wen.
Rcagent: Cloud root cause analysis by autonomous agents with tool-augmented large language models. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM

International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 4966–4974, 2024.
[180] Jason Wei, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jeff Dean, Yuhuai Li, Adam Roberts, Anna Rumshisky, Noam
Shazeer, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07682.
[181] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
[182] Yifan Wu, Siyu Yu, and Ying Li. Log parsing using llms with self-generated in-context learning and self-correction. InProceedings of the
33rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC 2025). IEEE/ACM, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03376.
Method name: AdaParser.
[183] Pei Xiao, Tong Jia, Chiming Duan, Minghua He, Weijie Hong, Xixuan Yang, Yihan Wu, Ying Li, and Gang Huang. Clslog: Collaborating
large and small models for log-based anomaly detection. InCompanion Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on
the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE Companion ’25), pages 686–690, Trondheim, Norway, June 2025. ACM. doi: 10 .1145/
3696630.3728524. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3696630.3728524.
[184] Yi Xiao, Van-Hoang Le, and Hongyu Zhang. Demonstration-free: Towards more practical log parsing with large language models. In
Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2024), pages 1243–1255. ACM, 2024.
doi: 10.1145/3691620.3694994. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3691620.3694994. Method name: LogBatcher.
[185] Xiaoyuan Xie, Zhipeng Cai, Songqiang Chen, and Jifeng Xuan. Fastlog: An end-to-end method to efficiently generate and insert logging
statements. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’24), pages 26–37.
ACM, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3650212.3652107. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.02862.
[186] Andy Xu and Arno Gau. Help: Hierarchical embeddings-based log parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08300, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.08300.
[187] Junjielong Xu, Ziang Cui, Yuan Zhao, Xu Zhang, Shilin He, Pinjia He, Liqun Li, Yu Kang, Qingwei Lin, Yingnong Dang, Saravan
Rajmohan, and Dongmei Zhang. Unilog: Automatic logging via LLM and in-context learning. InProceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24). ACM, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3597503.3623326.
[188] Junjielong Xu, Ruichun Yang, Yintong Huo, Chengyu Zhang, and Pinjia He. Divlog: Log parsing with prompt enhanced in-context
learning. InProceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24), pages 199:1–199:12, 2024.
doi: 10.1145/3597503.3639155. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639155.
[189] Junjielong Xu, Qinan Zhang, Zhiqing Zhong, Shilin He, Chaoyun Zhang, Qingwei Lin, Dan Pei, Pinjia He, Dongmei Zhang, and
Qi Zhang. Openrca: Can large language models locate the root cause of software failures? InThe Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2025.
[190] Weiyuan Xu, Juntao Luo, Tao Huang, Kaixin Sui, Jie Geng, Qijun Ma, Isami Akasaka, Xiaoxue Shi, Jing Tang, and Peng Cai. A two-staged
llm-based framework for ci/cd failure detection and remediation with industrial validation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03691, 2025.
[191] Yuuki Yamanaka, Tomokatsu Takahashi, Takuya Minami, and Yoshiaki Nakajima. LogELECTRA: Self-supervised anomaly detection
for unstructured logs.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10397.
[192] N. Yang, P. J. L. Cuijpers, D. Hendriks, R. Schiffelers, J. Lukkien, and A. Serebrenik. An interview study about the use of logs in
embedded software engineering.Empirical Software Engineering, 28(2):43, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s10664-022-10258-8.
[193] Tiankai Yang, Yi Nian, Li Li, Ruiyao Xu, Yuangang Li, Jiaqi Li, Zhuo Xiao, Xiyang Hu, Ryan A. Rossi, Kaize Ding, Xia Hu, and Yue Zhao.
AD-LLM: Benchmarking large language models for anomaly detection. InFindings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2025, pages 1524–1547, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.79.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.79/.
[194] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and
acting in language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629.
[195] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate
problem solving with large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601.
[196] Xian Yu, Shengxi Nong, Dongbiao He, Weijie Zheng, Teng Ma, Ning Liu, Jianhui Li, and Gaogang Xie. Loggenius: An unsupervised log
parsing framework with zero-shot prompt engineering. In2024 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), pages 1321–1328,
2024. doi: 10.1109/ICWS62655.2024.00159. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICWS62655.2024.00159.
[197] Chenbo Zhang, Wenying Xu, Jinbu Liu, Lu Zhang, Guiyang Liu, Jihong Guan, Qi Zhou, and Shuigeng Zhou. Logbase: A large-scale
benchmark for semantic log parsing. InProceedings of the 34th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA 2025). ACM, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3728969. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3728969.
[198] Chenbo Zhang, Wenying Xu, Jinbu Liu, Lu Zhang, Guiyang Liu, Jihong Guan, Qi Zhou, and Shuigeng Zhou. Semanticlog: Towards
effective and efficient large-scale semantic log parsing.IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2025. doi: 10 .1109/TSE.2025.3524891.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/11216353.
[199] Hao Zhang, Dongjun Yu, Lei Zhang, Guoping Rong, Yongda Yu, Haifeng Shen, He Zhang, Dong Shao, and Hongyu Kuang. Aucad:
Automated construction of alignment dataset from log-related issues for enhancing llm-based log generation. InProceedings of the
16th International Conference on Internetware, Internetware ’25, page 413–425, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing

Machinery. ISBN 9798400719264. doi: 10.1145/3755881.3755889. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3755881.3755889.
[200] Lingzhe Zhang, Tong Jia, Mengxi Jia, Yifan Wu, Aiwei Liu, Yong Yang, Zhonghai Wu, Xuming Hu, Philip Yu, and Ying Li. A survey of
aiops in the era of large language models.ACM Computing Surveys, 2025.
[201] Lingzhe Zhang, Tong Jia, Mengxi Jia, Yifan Wu, Hongyi Liu, and Ying Li. Scalalog: Scalable log-based failure diagnosis using
llm. InICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 1–5, 2025. doi:
10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025.10888670.
[202] Lingzhe Zhang, Tong Jia, Mengxi Jia, Yifan Wu, Hongyi Liu, and Ying Li. Xraglog: A resource-efficient and context-aware logbased anomaly detection method using retrieval-augmented generation. InAAAI 2025 Workshop on Preventing and Detecting LLM
Misinformation (PDLM), 2025.
[203] Lingzhe Zhang, Tong Jia, Kangjin Wang, Weijie Hong, Chiming Duan, Minghua He, and Ying Li. Adaptive root cause localization for
microservice systems with multi-agent recursion-of-thought.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20370, 2025.
[204] Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
[205] Ting Zhang, Xin Huang, Wen Zhao, Shaohuang Bian, and Peng Du. Logprompt: A log-based anomaly detection framework using
prompts. In2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–8, 2023. doi: 10 .1109/IJCNN54540.2023.10191948.
[206] Wanhao Zhang, Qianli Zhang, Enyu Yu, Yuxiang Ren, Yeqing Meng, Mingxi Qiu, and Jilong Wang. Leveraging rag-enhanced large
language model for semi-supervised log anomaly detection. In2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE), pages 168–179, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ISSRE62328.2024.00026.
[207] Wei Zhang, Xiangyuan Guan, Lu Yunhong, Jie Zhang, Shuangyong Song, Xianfu Cheng, Zhenhe Wu, and Zhoujun Li. Lemur: Log
parsing with entropy sampling and chain-of-thought merging, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18205.
[208] Xiao Zhang, Qi Wang, Mingyi Li, Yuan Yuan, Mengbai Xiao, Fuzhen Zhuang, and Dongxiao Yu. Tamo: Fine-grained root cause analysis
via tool-assisted llm agent with multi-modality observation data in cloud-native systems.IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 18
(6):4221–4233, 2025.
[209] Xuchao Zhang, Supriyo Ghosh, Chetan Bansal, Rujia Wang, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, and Saravan Rajmohan. Automated root causing
of cloud incidents using in-context learning with gpt-4. InCompanion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 266–277, 2024.
[210] Zhaohui Zhang, Shu Chen, and Dandan Shi. LogST: Log semi-supervised anomaly detection based on sentence-BERT. In2022 6th
International Conference on System Innovation (ICSIP), pages 356–361, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICSIP55141.2022.9886069.
[211] Haoyu Zheng, Guojun Chu, Haifeng Sun, Jingyu Wang, Shimin Tao, and Hao Yang. LogDAPT: Log data anomaly detection with domain-adaptive pretraining (industry track). InProceedings of the 24th International Middleware Conference: Industrial Track (Middleware
’23 Industry), pages 15–21. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. doi: 10 .1145/3626562.3626830. URL https://doi .org/10.1145/
3626562.3626830.
[212] Chen Zhi, Liye Cheng, Meilin Liu, Xinkui Zhao, Yueshen Xu, and Shuiguang Deng. Llm-powered zero-shot online log parsing. In2024
IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), pages 877–887. IEEE, 2024.
[213] Aoxiao Zhong, Dengyao Mo, Guiyang Liu, Jinbu Liu, Qingda Lu, Qi Zhou, Jiesheng Wu, Quanzheng Li, and Qingsong Wen. Logparserllm: Advancing efficient log parsing with large language models. InProceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pages 4559–4570, 2024.
[214] Renyi Zhong, Yichen Li, Jinxi Kuang, Wenwei Gu, Yintong Huo, and Michael R. Lyu. Logupdater: Automated detection and repair of
specific defects in logging statements.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3731754.
[215] Renyi Zhong, Yichen Li, Guangba Yu, Wenwei Gu, Jinxi Kuang, Yintong Huo, and Michael R. Lyu. Larger is not always better: Exploring
small open-source language models in logging statement generation.ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., October 2025. ISSN 1049-331X.
doi: 10.1145/3773287. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3773287. Just Accepted.
[216] Dahlia Ziqi Zhou and Marios Fokaefs. Ai assistants for incident lifecycle in a microservice environment: A systematic literature review.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04334, 2024.
[217] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Sch"arli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet,
Quoc V. Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv .org/
abs/2205.10625.
[218] Yihan Zhou, Yan Chen, Xuanming Rao, Yukang Zhou, Yuxin Li, and Chao Hu. Leveraging large language models and bert for log parsing
and anomaly detection.Mathematics, 12(17), 2024. ISSN 2227-7390. doi: 10 .3390/math12172758. URL https://www .mdpi.com/2227-7390/12/17/2758.
[219] Jieming Zhu, Pinjia He, Qiang Fu, Hongyu Zhang, Michael R. Lyu, and Dongmei Zhang. Learning to log: Helping developers make
informed logging decisions. InProceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE/ACM, 2015.
doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2015.60.
[220] Xuhang Zhu, Xiu Tang, Sai Wu, Gang Chen, Haobo Wang, Chang Yao, Quanqing Xu, and Jichen Li. CoLA: Model collaboration for
log-based anomaly detection.Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 18(11):3979–3987, 2025. doi: 10.14778/3749646.3749668.

[221] Xinkai Zou, Xuan Jiang, Ruikai Huang, Haoze He, Parv Kapoor, Hongrui Wu, Yibo Wang, Jian Sha, Xiongbo Shi, Zixun Huang, and
Jinhua Zhao. Towards generalizable context-aware anomaly detection: A large-scale benchmark in cloud environments, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01844.